A new Tragicall Comedie of Apius and Virginia, Wherein is liuely expreſſed a rare example of the vertue of Chaſt ••• e, by Virginias conſtancy, in wiſhing rather to be ſlaine at her be ſlaine at her owne Fa thers handes, then to be deflow red of the wicked Iudge Apius.
By R. B.
Qui cup •• aethereas & ſummas ſ • andere ſed ••
Vim ſimul ac fraudem diſcute chare tibi.
• rau • hic nulla 〈◊〉 , 〈◊〉 forti • facta i ••• b •• ,
Sola Dei tua te trahat, terſe fides.
Qui placet in terris intactae palludis inſtar,
Viuere Virgini • m nitore virgo ſequi,
Quo • tulit & luctus, diſcas gaudia magna
Vitae, dum p • r ••• ci • de • fila pareot.
Huc a ••• ô virgo, paritere moritura ſepulchre,
Sic ai • & faciem pallida morte mutat.
WHo doth deſire the trump of ſame, to ſound vnto the Skies,
Or els who ſeekes the holy place, where mighty Ioue he lies,
He muſt not by deceitfull mind, nor yet by puiſſant ſtrength,
But by the faith and ſacred lyfe, he muſt it win a length,
And what ſhe be that virgins lyfe, on earth wold gladly leade,
The Sluds that Virginia did fall, I wiſh her reade,
Her doller and vir dolefull loſſe, and yet her wyes at death,
Come Virgins pure to graue with mée, quoth ſhe with lateſt breath,
You Lordings all that preſent be, this Tragidie to heare,
Note well what zeale and loue, heerein doth well appeare,
And Ladies you that linked are, in wedlocke bandes for euer,
Do imitate the life you ſée, whoſe ſame will periſh neuer,
But Virgins you, oh Ladies faire, for honour of your name.
Doo lead the life apparent héere, to win immortall ſame,
Let not the blinded God of Loue, as Poets tearme him ſo,
Nor venus with her venery, nor Leehors cauſe of wo
Your Virgins name to ſpot or file: deare dames obſerue the like,
That faire Verginia did obſerue, who rather wiſh the knife,
Of fathers hand hir life to ende, then ſpot her chaſtety:
As ſhe did waile, waile you her want you maids of courteſte.
If any by example heere, would ſhun that great anoy,
Our Authour would reioyce in hart, and we would leap for ioy,
Would Gods that our indeuer may, as well to pleaſe your eares,
As is our Auctors meaning héere, then were we voyde of feares:
But paciently wee wiſh you beare with this our firſt attempt.
Which ſurely will to do our beſt, then yéeld vs no contempt,
And as you pleaſe in pacient wiſe, our firſt for to receiue,
Ere long a better ſhall you win, if god do graunt vs leaue.
BEfore the time that fortunes lot, dyd ſhew ech fate his dome,
Or Byrde, or Beaſt, or fiſh, or Foule, or Earth had taken rome
The Gods they did decree to frame, the thing is ended now,
The Heauens, and the Planets eke, and moyſt from ayre to bow.
Then framed they y e man of mould & clay, & gaue him time to raign,
As ſéemed beſt their ſacred minds, to runne and turne againe:
They framed aiſo after this, out of his tender ſide,
A péece of much formoſitie, with him for to abide:
From infanſie to luſty you, and ſo to raigne a while,
And well to liue, tyl Etas he vnwares, do him begyle.
And ſith to ſee theſe giftes of them, no grounded caue to vew,
Not daintyly to deck them vp, which after they may rew:
Wherfore I thank the Gods aboue, that yéeld to mee ſuch fate,
To lincke to ée ſo iuſt a ſpouſe, and eke ſo louing mate.
Ey her I haue a virgin pure, an ympe of heauenly race,
Boſh ſober, meeke, and modeſt too, and vertuous in lyke raſe:
To Temple will I wend therfore, to yéeld the Gods their praiſe,
For that they haue thus luckely, anexed with my daies.
But ſtay, behold the peereleſſe ſparks wherof my tongue dyd talke,
Approch in preſence of my ſight, to church I déeme they walk,
But ſtay I wyll, and ſhroud me ſecretly a while.
To ſee what witte or counſell graue, proceedeth from their ſtile.
The perte and pricking prime of youth, ought chaſtiſment to haue,
But thou deare daughter needeſt not, thy ſelf doth ſhew thee graue:
To ſe who Phoebus with his beames, hath youth ſo much inſected,
It doth me wee to ſee them craue the thing ſtould be detected.
I draw to graue, and naught can leaue of thee to be deſired,
As much as duty to thy deare, as reaſon hath required:
Thy ſufferent Lord and frindly feare, Virginius father thine,
To nourſe as doth become childe, when boanes are burried mine.
• e • el your minde of mournig plaints, deare mother reſt your minde
For though that duty dainty were, dame nature will me binde,
So much to do, and further force, of Gods that rule the Skies,
The Glope and eke the Clement, they would me els diſp • es.
Then if the Gods haue graunted thée, ſuch grace to loue thy ſyer,
When time ſhall chooſe thee out a make be conſtant I requier:
Loue, liue, and lyke him well, before you graunt him grace or faith,
So ſhall your loue continue long, experience thus he ſaith.
I graunt deare Dame I doo agree,
When time ſhall ſo prouide:
But tender youth and infanſie,
Doth rather wiſh me bide,
What ſhould I loſe Dianas gifte,
And eke the ſpring to ſhun:
By which Acteon fateally,
His finall race did run:
Should I as abiect be eſteemed,
Throughout Pernaſſus hill,
Or ſhould my Virgins name be filde,
It were to great a ſkyll:
But yet it is vnſpotted loe,
Right well I doo conceaue,
When wedlocke doth require the ſame,
With parents loue and leaue:
Yet obſtinate I wyll not be,
But willing will me yeeld:
When you commaund and not before
Then duety ſhall me ſheeld.
Ah Gods that rule and raine, in heauens, in ſeas, in flods and lands,
Two couple ſuch I ſurely dee me, you neuer made with hands,
A Gods why doo ye not compel eche Dame the lyke to ſhowe?
And euery Impe of her againe, her duty thus to know,
I cannot ſtay my tounge from talke, I needes muſt call my deare,
Oh ſpouſe wel met & Daughter to, what newes how do you cheare?
O deare Virginius Ioy to me, oh peareleſſe ſpouſe and mate,
In health I praiſe the Gods I am and ioifull for thy ſtate,
Virginia my daughter deare
How ſtandeth all with thée?
Like happie ſtate as mother tolde,
Like ioyfull ſight to mee.
By the Gods wife I ioy me, that haue ſuch a treaſure,
Such Gemme and ſuch Iuell, ſurmounting all meaſure:
Such a happy ſpouſe, ſuch a fortunate dame,
That no blot or ſtaine, can impayre her fame,
Againſt ſuch an Impe, and graffe of my tree,
As cleare doth ſurmount all others that bee.
Nay rather deare ſpouſe how much is my caſe,
To be now aduaunced by ſuch happy grace:
Doth dayly diſtill, my huſband ſo louing,
Graunting and geuing to all thing behouing,
Ioying in me, and in the fruicte of my wombe.
Who would not requit it, the Gods yeelde their dome
And if it be I, the Gods doo deſtroy mée,
Rather then ſinne, ſo ſore ſhould annoy me.
Oh wife refell thy wiſhing for woe,
My ſelfe thy faute rightwell do know:
And rather I wiſh my ſelfe to be ſlaine,
Then thou or thy daughter ought wo ſhould ſuſtaine.
Oh Father my comfort, oh Mother my ioy,
Oh Deare, and O ſufferaigne, do ceaſe to employ
Such dolorus talking, where dangers are none,
Where Ioyes are attendant, what néedeth this mone,
You matron, you ſpouſe, you Nurſe, and you wife,
You comfort, you only the ſome of his lyfe:
You houſband, you harte, you ioye, and you pleaſure,
You King, and you Keyſer, to her only treaſure,
You Father, you Mother, my lyfe doth ſuſtaine,
I babe and I bliſſe, your health am againe,
Forbeare then your dolor, let mirth be frequented
Let ſorow departe, and be not attempted.
Oh wife, oh ſpouſe, I am contente.
Oh Huſband.
Oh Father wee doo conſent.
The truſtieſt treaſure in earth earth as wée ſée,
Is man, wife and children in one to agrée,
Then friendly, and kindly, let meaſure be mixed
With reaſon, in ſeaſon, where friendſhip is fixed.
When nature nurſed firſt of all, yong Alexander learned,
Of who ̄ the Poets mention make, in iudgement ſo deſerned,
Oh what did want that loue procured his vital end well neare,
This is the hope where parents loue, their children do not feare,
The truſtieſt treaſure in earth as wée ſée,
Is man wife and children &c.
When time King Niſus would not let, his daughter to be taught,
Of any one correcting hand to nurtue to be brought:
She void of duty cut his lockes, and golden treſſes cleare,
Whereby his realme was ouerrun, and ſhe was payd her hisr,
The truſtieſt treaſure in earth as we ſee,
Is man wife and children. &c.
When Dedalus from Creete did flie,
With Icaru, his ioy:
He naught regarding fathers words,
Did ſeeke his owne anoy:
He mounted vp into the ſkies,
Wherat the Gods did frowne,
And Phoebus ſore his winges did frie,
And hedlonge flins him downe.
The truſtieſt treaſure in earth as we ſee.
Is man wife and children &c.
Then ſith that perſualitie, doth partly diſcorde mone,
And hatred often times doth creepe where ouermuch wee loue:
And if we loue no whit at all, the faming trump will ſound,
Come wife, come ſpouſe, come daughter deare, let meaſure beare y e ground.
The truſtieſt treaſure in earth as we ſee
Is man wife and children in one to agree,
Then friendly, and kindly, let meaſure be mixed, Exit.
With reaſon, in ſeaſon, where frindſhip is fixed.
VEry well ſir, very well ſir, it ſhalbe doone,
As faſt as euer I can prepare,
Who dippes with the Diuel, he had neede haue a long ſpoone.
Or els full ſmale wil be his fare:
Yet a proper Gentileman I am of truthe
Yea that may yee ſee by my long ſide gowne.
Yea but what am I, a Scholer, or a ſcholemaiſter, or els ſome youth.
A Lawier, a ſtudient or els a countrie cloune
A Brumman, a Baſkit m •• er, or a Baker of Pies,
A fleſh or a Fiſhmon zer, or a ſower of lies:
A Louſe or a louſer, a Leeke or a Larke:
A Dreamer a Drommell, a fire or a ſparke;
A Caitife, a Cutthrote, a creper in corners,
A herbraine, a hangman, or a grafter of horners:
By the Gods, I know not how beſt to deniſe,
My name or my property, well to diſguiſe:
A Marchaunte, a May poole, a man or a mackrell:
A Crab or a Creuiſe, a Crane or a cockerell:
Moſt of all theſe my nature doth inioy,
Somtime I aduaunce them, ſomtime I deſtroy,
A mayde or a Muſſell Bote, a wife or a wilde ducke,
As bolde as blinde bayerd, as wiſe as a wood cocke.
As fine as phippence, as proude as a Pecocke,
As ſtout as a Stockefiſh, as méeke as a mecocke,
As bigge as a begger, as fat as a foole,
As true as a Tinker, as riche as an Owle,
With hey tricke, how trowle, trey trip, and trey trace,
Trowle hazard in a vengeance I beſhrew his knaues face
For tro, and trowle hazard, kéepe ſuch a range
That poore haphazard, was neuer ſo ſtrange,
But yet Haphazard, be of good chéere,
Goe play and repaſt thée man, be mery to yéere:
Though vittaile be dainty and hard for to get.
Yet perhaps a number will die of the ſwet,
Though it be in hazard, yet happely I may,
Though mony be lacking, yet one day go gay.
When Maud, with a peſtelence, what makeſt thou no haſt?
Of Baybery inſence belike thou wouldeſt taſt,
By the Gods I haue ſtayed a full great while,
My lorde he is neare hand by this at the Church ſtile,
and al for Maud mumble turde, that mampodding madge
By the Gods if ſhe hie not, ile geue her my badge.
What drake noſed driuell, begin you to floute.
Zle frie you in a fagot ſticke, by cocke goodman loute
You boaſter you bragger, you brawling knaue:
Zle pay thee thy fortypence, thou brawling ſlaue:
My Ladies great buſines belike is at ende,
When you goodman dawcocke, luſt for to wend,
You, codſhed you crackerope, you chattering pye,
Haue with ye, haue at ye, your manhode to try.
What holde your hands maſters, what? fie for ſhame fie,
What culling? What lulling? What ſtur haue wee here?
What tugging? What lugging? What pugging by the eare,
What part and be freinds, and ende all this ſtrife,
Nay rather I Wiſhe hir, the end of my knife:
Drawe it, geue mée it, I will it receaue,
So that for the place it, I might haue good leaue,
By the Gods: but for loſing my land, lyfe, and liuing,
It ſhould be ſo placed, he ſhould haue ill thriuinge:
By the Gods how vngraciouſly the vickſen ſhe chatteth,
And he euen as knauiſhly, my anſwer he patteth,
Here is naught els, but railing of words out of reaſon,
Now tugging, now tatling, now muſling in ſeaſon,
For ſhame be contented and leaue of this brawling,
Content, for I ſhall repent it, for this my tonge wralling:
Thou knaue, but for thee, ere this time of day,
My Ladies faire Pue, had been ſtrawed full gay:
With Primroſes, Couſlips, and Violets ſweete:
With Mints, and with Marigolds, and Margerum meete,
Which now lyeth vncleanly and all long of thée,
That a ſhame recompence thee, for hindring mee,
Ah pretie pranck parnel, the Couſhen and Booke,
Whereon he ſhoulde reade and kneele, are preſent here looke:
My Lorde when he ſeeth mee, he will caſt ſuch an eye,
As pinch wyll my hart neare ready to die:
And thus wiſe, and thus wiſe, his hand wyll be walking
With thou precious knaue, away get thee packing ¶ Here let hym fight.
Nay then by the maſſe, its time to be knacking,
No words at all but to me he is poynting:
Nay haue at you againe, you ſhall haue your annoynting,
Body of me, hold yf ye can,
What will you kill ſuch a proper man?
Nay ſure I haue done when women do ſpeake,
Why would the knaue my pacience ſo breake?
Well I muſt begon, there is no remedy
For feare my tyle makes buttons, by mine honeſty.
For reuerence on your face, your noſe and your chin:
By the Gods haue ye hard ſuch an vnmannerly villin.
I neuer heard one ſo ra • cke of rudneſſe,
In faith it is but for ſacke of lewdneſſe:
But here I burne day light, while thus I am talking
A way come Manſipula, let vs be walking,
Contented Manſipulus, haue with thee with ſpeede,
Nay ſtay yet my freendes I am not agreede.
Wee dare not tary, by God wee ſweare.
Nay tarry take comfort with you for to beare,
It is but in hazard and yf you be miſt,
And ſo it may happen you feele not his firſt:
Perhaps he is ſtayde by talke with ſome friend
It is but in hazarde, then ſing or you wend
Let hope be your helper, your care to defend.
By hap or by hazard, we ſinge or we crie,
Then ſinge let vs ſay ſo, let ſorow go by.
We can be but beaten that is the worſt,
What how Manſipulus, thou knaue art thou curſte
My lorde ſtandeth talking and I gape for thée,
Come away with a wannion, runne haſt and hie,
Nay herken Supſeruus, ſtay I pray thée,
Let us haue a ſong and then haue with thée:
Content if thou hie thee.
Hope ſo, and hap ſo, in hazard of threfninge,
The worſt that can hap le, in end is but beating.
What if my Lordinge, doo chaunce for to miſſe me,
The worſt that can happen, is Cudgell will kiſſe mee,
In ſuch kinde of ſweetnes, I ſweare by Gods mother,
It will pleaſe me better, it were on ſome other,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our ſyde ſaddle ſhoulders ſhal ſheſide that doth come?
Hope ſo, and hay ſo, in hazarde &c.
¶ If caſe that my Lady, do threaten my caſe,
No cauſe to contrary, but beare hir a ſpace,
Untill ſhe draw home lo, where ſo ſhe will vſe me,
As Docters doth doubt it, how I ſhould excuſe me,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our ſide ſaddle ſhoulders ſhal ſheilde that doth come.
Hope ſo, and hap ſo, in hazard &c.
¶ What if your company cauſe me haue woo,
I minde not companyons ſo ſoone to forgo:
Let hope holde the Helmet, till brunt it be paſt,
For bloes are but buffits and words but a blaſt,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our ſide ſaddle ſhoulders ſhal ſheild that doth come,
Hope ſo, and hap ſo, in hazard &c.
¶ Then let vs be mery, it is but by hap,
A hazardly thaunce may harbor a clap,
Beſtur ye, be mery, be glad and be ioying,
For bloes are but buffits and ſmale time annoying,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our ſide ſadle ſhoulders ſhal ſheild that doth come.
Hope ſo, and hap ſo, in hazard &c.
Haphazard farewell, the Gods do thanke thee. Exiunt
Farwell my friends, farwell gee pracke yée:
By the Gods Haphazard, Theſe men haue tried thee,
Who ſayd thou waſt no man, ſure he belied thée,
By loue maſter Marchant by ſea or by land,
Would get but ſmale argent, if I did not ſtand,
His very good maſter, I may ſay to you,
When he hazards in hope, what hap will inſue:
In court I am no man, by cocke ſir ye lie,
A Plowman perhaps or ere that he die,
May hap be a Gentleman, a Courtier or Captaine,
And hap may ſo hazard, he may goe a begging:
Perhap that a Gentleman, heyre to great land,
Which ſelleth his liuing, for mony in hand,
In hazard it is the bying of more,
Perhaps he may ride when ſpent is the ſtore:
Hap may ſo hazard the Moone may ſo chaunge.
That men may be maſters, and wiues will not raunge:
But in hazard it is in many a grange,
Leſt wiues were the Godpeece, and maydens coy ſtrange:
As Pecockes ſit perking, by chaunce in the plomtrée,
So maides would be maſters, by the guiſe of this countrey
Haphazard eche ſtate full well that he markes,
If hap the ſkie fall, we hap may haue Larkes:
Well, fare ye well now, for better or worſe,
Put hands to your pockets, haue minde to your purſe.
THe ſorowed face of Fortunes force, my pinching paine doth moue
I ſetled ruler of my realme inforced am to loue:
Iudge Apius I the prmeeleſt Iudge, that raigneth vnder ſonne,
And haue bene ſo eſtaeemed long, but now my force is done:
I rule no more, but ruled am, I do not Iudge, but am Iudged,
By beuty of Virginia, my wiſdome all is trudged,
Oh pereleſſe Dame, Oh paſſing peece, oh face of ſuch a fature,
That neuer e • ſt with bower ſuch, matched was by nature:
Oh fond Apelles pratling foole, why boaſteſt thou ſo much?
The famoſt pee • e thou madſt in Greece, whoſe •• ments were
Or why oldſt thou dec • ued man, for beuty of thy worke?
In ſuch a ſort with fond deſtre, where no kinde lyfe dyd lurke,
With raging fits thou foole ran mad, oh fond Pigmalion,
Yet ſure if that thou ſaweſt my deare, the like y e couldſt make none,
Then what may I, oh Gods aboue, bend downe to heare my crie,
As once he did to Salmaſis, in Pond hard Lyzia by:
Oh that Virginia were in caſe as ſomtime Salmaſis,
And in Hermafroditus ſteede, my ſelfe might ſéeke my bliſſe,
Ah Gods, would I vnfolde her armes, complecting of my necke?
Or would I hurt her nimble hand, or yéelde her ſuch a checke?
Would I gainſay hir tender ſkinne, to baath where I do waſhe?
Or els refuſe hir ſoft ſweete lippes, to touch my naked fleſhe?
Nay, oh the Gods do know my minde, I rather would requier,
To ſue, to ſerue, to crouch, to kneele, to craue for my deſter.
But out ye Gods, ye bende your browes, and frowne to ſée me fare,
Ye do not force my fickle fate, ye do not way my care,
Unrighteous, and vnequall Gods, vniuſt, and eke vnſure,
Woe worth the time ye made me liue, to ſée this hapleſſe houre:
Dyd Iphis hang himſelfe for loue, of Lady not ſo faire?
Or els did Ioue the cloudie miſtes, bend downe from lightſome ayre:
Or as the Poets mencion make, of Inachs daughter meeke,
For loue dyd he to make a Cowe, whom Inach long dyd ſéeke:
Is loue ſo great, to cauſe the quicke, to enter into Hell,
As ſtout Orpheus did attempt, as hiſtories do tell?
Then what is it that loue cannot? Why loue dyd pearce the ſkies:
Why Pheb. and famous Marcury, with loue had blinded eies?
But I a Iudge of grounded yeeres, ſhall reape to me ſuch name,
As ſhall reſounde diſhonour great, with Trump of careleſſe fame:
Oh that my yeeres were youthfull yet, or that I were vnweded.
WHy ceaſe ſir Knight, for why perhaps, of you ſhe ſhalbe bedded:
For folow my counſell, ſo may you me pleaſe,
That of carefull reſurging, your hart ſhall haue eaſe.
Oh thundring Gods that threaten yre,
and Plague for eche offence:
Your ſelues I déeme would counſell craue,
in this ſo fit pretence:
And eke your nimble ſtretched armes,
with great rewards would ſhe,
To purchaſe farie Virginia,
ſo deare a wight to me:
And friend, I ſweare by Iubiter,
and eke by Iunos ſeate:
And eke by all the miſteries,
where on thou canuſt intreate:
Thou ſhalt poſſeſſe and haue,
I will thée graunt and geue,
The greateſt part of all my Realme,
for aye thee to releeue.
Well then, this is my counſell, thus ſtandard the caſe,
Perhaps ſuch a ſetch, as may pleaſe your grace:
There is no more wayes, but hap or hap not,
Either hap, or els hapleſſe, to knit vp the knot:
And if you will hazard, to venter what falles,
Perhaps, that Haphazard, will end al your thralles.
I meane ſo. I will ſo, if thou do perſwade me,
To hap or to hazard, what thing ſhall enuade me:
I King and I Keyſer, I rule and ouerwhealme:
I do what it pleaſe me, with in this my realme:
Wherfore in thy indgement, ſee that thou do enter,
Hap life or hap death, I ſurely will venter.
Then this, and in this ſorte, ſtandeth the matter,
What neede many wordes, vnleſſe I ſhould flatter,
Full many there be, will hazard their life,
Happely to caſe your grace of all your ſtrife,
Of this kinde of conſpiraſie now let vs common,
Some man, Virginius, before you muſt ſummon,
And ſay that Virginia is none of his Daughter.
But that Virginius by night away caught her:
Then charge you the father his Daughter to bringe,
Then do you detayne hir, till proued be the thing:
Which well you may win hir, ſhe preſent in houſe,
It is but Haphazarde, a man or a mouſe
I finde it, I minde it, I ſweare that I will,
Though ſhame, or defame, do happen no ſkill, Here let him make at though he went out and let Con ſince and lu ſtice come out of him, and let Conſiéce hold in his hande a Lamp burning and let Iuſtice haue a ſworde and hold it be fore Apius
But out I am wounded, how am I deuided?
Two ſtates of my life, from me are now glided,
For Conſience he pricketh me contempned,
And Iuſtice ſaith, Iudgement wold haue me condem ned:
Conſience ſaith crueltye ſure will deteſt me:
And Iuſtice ſaith, death in thende will moleſt me,
And both in one ſodden me thinkes they do crie,
That fier eternall, my ſoule ſhall deſtroy.
Why theſe are but thoughts man? why fie for ſhame fie
For Conſience was careleſſe, and ſayling by ſeas,
Was browned in a baſket and had a diſeaſe,
Sore mooued for pitye, when he would graunt none,
For beyng hard harted, was turned to a ſtone:
And ſayliing by Sandwitche he ſunke for his ſin,
Then care not for conſience, the worth of a pin:
And Iudgement iudge Iuſtice to haue a reward,
For iudging ſtill iuſtly, but all is now marde,
For giftes they are geuen, wher Iudgement is none,
Thus Iudgement and Iuſtice awronge way hath gone:
Then care not for Conſience the worth of a fable,
Iuſtice is no man, nor nought to do able.
And ſaieſt thou ſo my ſured fréende, then hap as hap ſhall hit,
Let Conſtence grope, & iudgement craue, I wil not ſhrink one whit
I well perſeuer in my thought, I will deflower hir youth,
I will not ſure reuerted be, my hart ſhall haue no ruth,
Come on proceede and wayteou me, I will hap woe or wealth,
Hap blunt, hap ſharp, hap life, hap death, though Haphazard be of health
At hand (quoth picke purſe) here redy am I,
See well to the Cut Purſe, be ruled by me.
O cleare vnſpotted giftes of Loue,
How haps thou art refuſed?
Oh Conſience cleare, what cruell minde
Thy truth hath thus miſuſed?
I ſpotted am by wilfull will,
By lawles loue and luſte
By dreadfull daunger of the life.
By faith that is vniuſt.
Ah gift of Ioue, ah Fortunes face,
Ah ſtate of ſteddy life:
I Iuſtice am and Prime of péeres,
The end of Lawes and ſtrife:
A guider of the common weale,
A gwerdon to the poore:
And yet hath filthy luſt ſuppreſt,
My vertues in one houre,
Well well this is the moſt to truſt,
In ende we ſhall eſpire:
To ſee the end of theſs our foes
With ſword and eke with fire.
Oh help ye Gods, we members require.
When gayne is no granſier,
And gaudes naught ſet by:
Nor Puddings, nor Pie meate,
Poore knaues will come nie:
Then hap and Haphazard,
Shall haue a new cote:
And ſo it may happen.
To cut couetouſneſſe throte:
Yea then ſhall Iudge Apius.
Virginia obtayne:
And Geeſe ſhall cracke Muſſels,
Perhaps in the rayne:
Lerkes ſhalbe Leuerets,
And ſkip to and fro:
And chourles ſhalbe codſheads,
Perhaps and alſo:
But peace for mans body,
Haphazard be mum,
Fie pratlyng noddy,
Iudge Apius is come.
THe furies fell of Lymbo Lake.
my Princely daies doo ſhorte:
All drownde in deadly woes I liue,
that once dyd ioy in ſport,
I liue and languiſh in mylyſe,
as doth the wounded Deare:
I thirſt, I craue, I call and crie,
and yet am naught the meare:
And yet I haue that me ſo match,
But Tantalus amids my care,
I hunger ſterue and pine:
As Siſsifus I roule the ſtone,
in vaine to top of Hill:
That euermore vncertainly,
reuoluing ſlideth ſtill:
Oh, as if to her it were to me,
what labours would I flie?
What raging ſeas would I not plow,
to her commoditie?
But out alas I doubt it ſore,
leſt drouſy Morpheus:
His ſlumbry kingdomes graunted hath,
with Dewes and bewtious:
Oh Gods aboue that rule the Skies,
ye Babes that bragge in bliſſe:
Ye Goddeſſes, ye Graces you,
what burning brunt is this?
Bend downe your Ire, deſtroy me quicke:
or els to graunt me grace,
No more but that my burning breſte,
Virginia may imbace:
If caſe your eares be dead and deafe,
the Feende and ſprites beloe:
You careleſſe • arl • of Limbo Lake,
your forced mightes doo ſhoe.
Thou Caitife Kinge of darkſome den,
thou Pluto plaged knaue:
Send forth thy ſacred vengeaunce ſtraight,
conſume them to the graue:
That will not aide my caſe,
Content and if it like your grace,
I will attempt the deede:
I ſommon will Virginius,
before your ſeat with ſpéede,
Do ſo, my Lorde be you not afrayde,
And ſo you may happen to Hazard the mayde:
It is but in Hazard, and may come by hap,
Win her, or loſe her, trie you the trap.
By the Gods, I conſent to thee Claudius now
Prepare the in haſte Virginius vnto,
Charge him, commaund him, vpon his alegeance
With all kinde of ſpéede, to yéelde his obeyſance,
Before my ſeate in my conſiſtary
Subpene of lande, life and treaſurie.
No let, no ſtay, nor ought perturbraunce,
Shall cauſe me to omit the furtheraunce,
Of this my waighty charge: Exit.
Well now I range at large my will for to expreſſe,
For looke how Torquin, Lucres faire, by force did once oppreſſe,
Euen ſo will I Virginia vſe:
Iudge Apius prince, oh ſtay refuſe,
Be ruled by thy friende:
What bloudy death with open ſhame,
Did Torquin gaine in ende?
Whence doth this pinching ſounde defende?
From contrit Conſcience pricked on,
By member of thy lyfe,
Enforced for to cry and call,
And all to end our ſtrife.
What art thou theu declare be bréefe?
Not fleſh nor filthy luſt I am:
But ſecret conſience I,
Compeld to crie with trimbling ſoule,
At point nere hand to die.
Why no diſeaſe dath me aproche, no griefe doth make me grudge,
But want of faire Virginia, whoſe beauty is my Iudge:
By hir I liue, by hir I die, for hir I wy or woe,
For hir my ſoule doth ſinke or ſwimme, for hir I ſwere I goe.
Ah Gods, what wittes doth rame, and yet to you vnknowen?
I die the death, and ſoule doth ſinke, this filthy fleſh hath ſowen.
I force it not, I wyll attempt, I ſtay for Claudius heare,
Yet wyll I goe to meete with him, to know what newes and cheare.
Haſt for a hangman, in hazard of hempe
Runne for a riddueke, there is no ſuch impe:
Claudius is knocking, with hammer and ſtone,
At Virginius gate, as hard as he can lay one:
By the Gods my maiſters, Haphazard is hardy,
For he will run raſhly, be they neuer ſo many,
Yea he wyll ſinge ſowſnowt, and ſknap with the beſt,
But peace, who comes yonder, what Iely good geſt?
WHen men will ſeeme miſdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry,
And fearing with temerety, its ieopardy, of libertie,
Wee wiſh him take to chere his hart, Haphazard,
Boulde blinde bayarde,
A Fygge for his vncourteſie,
That ſeekes to ſhun good company.
What if caſe that cruelty, ſhould buſſell me, and iuſſell mée,
And Holywand ſhould tirkle me, for keeping of good companye:
Ile folow by my honeſtie, hap Haphazard, bould blinde bayard,
A figge for his nvrourteſie, that ſeekes to ſhun good companie.
When men wyll ſeeme miſdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and crie. &c.
Neuer was that miſteris, ſo furious nor curious,
Nor yet hir bloes ſo boiſterous, nor roſterous, nor dolorous,
But ſure I would venterous, hap Haphazard, boulde blinde bayard
A figge for his vncourteſie, that ſeekes to ſhun good companie.
When men wyll ſeeme miſdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and crue. &c.
Then wend ye on and folow me, Manſipula, manſipula.
Let cropyng cares be caſt away, come folow me, come folow me,
Subſeruus is a ioyly loute, brace Haphazard bould blinde bayarde,
A figge for his vncourteſie, that ſeekes to ſhun good company.
When men will ſeeme miſdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry. &c.
I by the Gods my mayſters, I tould you plaine,
Who companyes with me, will deſire me agayne:
But how dyd ye ſpaede I pray ye ſhew me,
Was all well agreed did no body blow ye.
Maſſe ſyr, hap dyd ſo happen, that my Lorde and maiſter,
Staied in behelding and viewing the Paſture.
Which when I perceiued, what excuſe did I make?
I came in the croſſe way, on the nerſide the Forlake,
Hard by Hodges halfe aker, at gaffers Millers ſtile.
The next way round about, by the ſpace of a mile,
Andat Sy mkins ſide ridge, my Lord ſtoode talking,
And angerly to me (quoth he) wher haſt thou ben walking
Without any ſtaggeryng, I had ready my lye,
Out at Bridgenredow, and at Benols leaſe (quoth I)
Your fatlings are feding well Sir, the Gods be praiſed,
A goodly loume of beef on them is all redy raiſed,
The outſteps on Frauncis Fabulator that was neuer my friende,
How paſt you Carters hay rocke, at long medow ende
There might one (quoth he) within this few dayes,
With a caſt net had geuen, mi knaues great aſſayes:
Under the Hedge with a payre of new Cardes both rip and firdge,
Is it true quoth my Lorde, will this geare neuer be lefte,
This cauſes ſwearing, and ſtaring, proling and thefte:
Well (quoth my Lorde) take hede leaſt I finde it,
And ſo paſt his way, and did no more minde it.
By the Gods that was ſport, ye and ſport alone,
Yea, but I was in worſe caſe by Saint Jhon,
My Lady in Church was ſet full douout,
And hearing my comming ſhe tourned aboute:
But as ſoone as I heard hir ſnappiſhly ſounde,
In this ſorte I crouched me downe to the grounde,
And mannerly maude, as though I were ſad,
As ſoone as the Pue then ſtrawed I had,
She gaue me a wincke, and frowardly frowne,
Wherby I do iudge, ſhe woulde cougell my gowne:
Then I dyd deuiſe, a prety fine pranke,
A meane whereby to picke me a thanke:
Of Margery Mildon the maide of the Milke houſe,
And ſtainer the ſtutter the guid of the ſtore houſe,
Then was my Ladies anger well gone,
And wilbe ſo ſtill, and the truthe be not knowne.
• er lady, barefoote this bakes trimly,
Nay but I eſcaped more finely,
For I vnder this bedge one while dyd ſtay,
Then in this buſhe, then in that way:
Then ſlipt I behind them among all the reſt,
And ſéemed to common to, of things with the beſt,
But ſo it did happen, that all things were well,
But hazard it is, leaſt time will truth tell.
Tut, tut, that was but by hap, and if it be ſo,
Well ſith it was in hazard then let it goo.
Content by my honeſtie, then farewell all wo.
Come out dogge, ye ſpeake happely of truth if it be ſo,
Now maſter Haphazard, fare you well for a ſeaſon,
Let my councell at no time with you be geaſon.
No by the Gods, be ſure not ſo.
Well ſith here is no company haue with ye to Jerico. Exit.
What ſo the Gods they haue decreed to worke and do by me?
I meruaile why Iudge Apius he, ſuch gretings lets me ſee:
I ſerued haue his ſeate, and ſtate, I haue maintaind his weale,
I haue ſuppreſt the rebels ſtoute, I beare to him ſuch zeale,
And now he ſends to me ſuch charge, vpon my life and lands,
Without demur, or further pauſe, or ere ought things be ſcand,
That I in haſt, with poſting ſpeede, to Court I do repaire,
To aunſwer that aleaged is, before his Iudgement Chaire,
Some Hiſtories they do expreſſe, when ſuch miſhaps do fall,
They ſhould haue tokens many a one, I haue not one but all:
My Iuels ſomtime precious, do vade and beare no hewe,
My ſeuces they do ſhun there courſe, my lights do burne as blewe:
My willing wights are wared ſlow, that once were ſwifte in ſpeede
My hart it throbs in wonderous ſort, my noſe doth often bleede:
My dreadfull dreames do draw my woe and hatefull hazard hale,
Theſe tokens be of euell hap, this is the old wiues tale:
But yet O thou Virginius, whoſe hoary heares are olde,
Didſt treaſon neuer yet commit, of this thou maiſt be bould:
In Mars his games, in marſhall frates, thou waſt his only aide,
The huge Carrebd his hazards thou, for him was ofte aſſaide:
Was Sillas force by thee oft ſhunde, or yet Adrice lande,
Laceface childe that Minnotaur, did cauſe thee euer ſtande:
To pleaſure him, to ſerue thy leach, to keepe all things vpright,
Thou God aboue, then what is it, that yéeldeth me this ſpight?
Sith nothing néede miſdoubted be, where grounded cauſe is none,
I enter will Iudge Apius gate, reiecting care and mone:
But ſtay Virginius, loe, thy Prince doth enter into place,
Oh ſufferant Lord, and rightfull Iudge, the Gods do ſaue thy grace,
With tender hart Virginius, thou welcome art to me,
I ſory am to vtter out, the things I here of thee:
For Claudius a ſubiecte here, a man of mickle fame,
Appealeth thee before my Courte, in deede of open ſhame:
And though in deede I loue thee ſo, as thy deſerts deſirer,
Yet not ſo but I muſt Iudgement geue, as Iuſtice doth require.
My Lord and reaſon good it is, your ſeruaunt doth requeſt,
No parciall hand to aide his cauſe, no parciall minde or breſt:
If ought I haue offended you, your Courte, or eke your Crowne,
From lofty top of Turret hie, perſupetat me downe:
If treaſon none by me be done, or any fault committed,
Let my accuſers beare the blame, and let me be remitted.
Good reaſon to Virginius, come Claudius ſhew thy minde,
Let Iuſtice here, if Iudgment may, Virginus gilty finde
Thou ſufferant Lord, and rightfull Iudge, this ſtandeth now y e caſe,
In tender youth not long agone, nere ſixtene yeares of ſpace,
Virginius a thrall of mine, a childe and infant yonge,
From me did take by ſubtell meane, and keepes by arme full ſtrong
And here before your grace I craue, that Iuſtice be exſtended,
That I may haue my thrall agayne, and faultes may be amended
Ah Gods that guide the globe aboue what forged tales I here,
Oh Iudge Apius, bend your eares, while this my crime I cleare:
She is my child, and of my wife her tender corpes did ſpringe,
Let all the countrey where I dwell, beare witneſſe of the thing.
Nay by the Gods not ſo my friend, I do not ſo decrée,
I charge thee here in paiine of death, thou bring the maide to mée:
In chamber cloſe, in priſon ſound, ſhe ſecret ſhall abide,
And no kinde of wight ſhall talke with her, vntill the truth be tride:
This doo I charge, this I commaund, in paine of death let ſee,
Without any let, that ſhe be brought, as priſoner vnto me:
Ah fickle faule, vnahppy dome, oh moſt vncertaine rate,
That euer chaunce ſo churliſhly, that neuer ſtaide in ſtate:
What Iudge is this: What cruell wretch? What faith doth Claudius
The Gods do recompence with ſhame, his falſe and faithles minde:
Well home I muſt, no remedy, where ſhall my ſoking teares,
Augment my woes, decreaſe my ioyes, while death do rid my feares
Come ventus come, blow forth thy blaſt,
Prince Eol liſten well,
The filthieſt fackte that euer was,
I Rumor now ſhall tell:
You gods bend downe to here my crie,
reuengemente duly ſhowe,
Thy Rumor craues did Claudius lay,
and bring Iudge Apius loe?
That wicked man, that fleſhly Iudge,
hath hiered Claudius,
To claime a childe, the only heyre,
of olde Virginius.
A virgin pure, a Quéene in life,
whoſe ſtate may be deplored,
For why the Queene of chaſte life,
is like to be defloured:
By falſe Iudge Apius cruell wretche,
who ſtraightly hath commaunded,
That ſhe to keping his be brought,
Prince Pluto this demaunded:
To ſkies I flie to blaſe abrode,
the trompe of depe defame,
Reuenge yo • Gods this Rumor craues,
this bloud and bloddy ſhame:
Haue through the ayre, geue place you ayres.
this is my dutye done,
The Gods confound ſuch lecherers,
loe Rumor this I run.
O man, O mould, oh mucke, O clay, O Hell, O helliſh hounde,
O • aulle Iudge Apius wrablinge wretch, is this thy treaſon found:
Woe worth the man that gaue the ſeede, wherby y e firſt didſt ſpring
Woe worth the wombe y t bare the babe, to meane this bluddy thing:
Woe worth the paps that gaue y e ſucke, woe worth the Foſters eke
Woe worth all ſuch as euer did, thy health or liking ſeeke:
Oh that the graued yeares of mine, were couered in the clay
Let pacience deare father mine, your rigor ſomething ſtay,
Why do you waile in ſuch a ſorte? why do you weepe and mone?
Oh doughter deare and only heyre, my life is neare forgone,
And all for loue of thee
A Gods how may this be?
Deare father do withdraw your dread, and let me know the cauſe,
My ſelfe wyll ayde with lyfe or death, without demur or pauſe:
Then tender your childe, that craueth this bound.
Oh harken deare daughter attend thou my ſounde:
Iudge Apius prickt forth with filthy deſire:
Thy perſon as Lemmon, doth greatly require:
And no kinde of intreatie, no feare nor no ſhame,
Will he heare aledge, defending the ſame:
And ſtraight without ſtaying in paine of my death,
I muſt bring thee thither, wherfore ſtop my breath,
O Siſters, I ſearch, I ſeeke, and I craue,
No more at your handes, but death for to haue,
Rather then ſee my Daughter deflourde,
Or els in ill ſorte, ſo vildely deuourde.
Oh father oh friendſhip, oh fatherly fauour,
Whoſe dulſet words, ſo ſweetly do ſauour,
On knees I beſeeche thee to graunt my requeſt,
In all things according, as lyketh thee beſt:
Thou knoweſt, O my father, if I be once ſpotted,
My name and my kindred, then forth wilbe blotted:
And if thou my father, ſhould die for my cauſe,
The world would accompt me as gilty in cauſe:
Then rather deare father, if it be thy pleaſure,
Graunt me the death, then keepe I my treaſure?
My Lampe, my light, my life vndefiled,
And ſo may Iudge Apius, of fleſh be begiled:
This vpon my knees with humble beheſte,
Graunt me O father my inſtant requeſte.
Then ryſe vp my daughter, my aunſwere doo note,
From mouth of thy father, whoſe eyes do now flote:
O daughter, oh deare, O darling, oh dame,
Diſpatch me I pray thee, reg • rde not my name:
But yet, as thou ſateſt fith remedy none,
But Lemmon thou muſt be, if I were gone,
And better it is to dye with good fame,
Then longer to liue to reape vs but ſhame:
But if thou do dye, no doubt is at all,
But preſently after my ſelfe folow ſhall,
Then end without ſhauie ſo let vs perſeuer,
With trompe of good ſame ſo dye ſhall we neuer.
Then tender armes complect the neck, doo dry thy fathers teares,
You nimble handes for wo whereof, my louing hart it weares:
Oh father mine, refraine no whit, your ſharped knife to take,
From giltles ſheath, my ſhame to ende, and body dead to make:
Let not the ſhameles blouddy iudge, defile my virgins life,
Doe take my head and ſend it him, vpon your bloudy knife:
Bid him imbrue his bloudy handes, in giltles bloud of mee:
I virgin dye, he leacher liues, he was my ende you ſee:
No more delayes, ſo kiſſe me firſt, then ſtretch your ſtrongeſt arme,
Do ryd my woe, increaſe my ioy, do eaſe your childe of harme.
O weary wittes of wo, or wealth, oh feble aged man,
How can thy arme geue ſuch a blow, thy death I wiſhe thee than:
But ſith that ſhame with endles trempe, wil ſounde if caſe thou ioy,
By meanes of falſe iudge Apius he, myſelfe will thee deſtroy:
Forgeue me babe this bloudy deede, a no meekely take thy ende,
The Gode forgeue thee father deare, farewell, thy blow do bend:
Yet ſtay a whyle, o father deare, for fleaſh to death is fraile,
Let firſt my wimple bind my eyes, and then thy blow aſſaile.
Now father worke thy will on me, that life I may inioy.
Now ſtretch thy hand Virginius, that loth would fleſh diſtroy.
O cruell handes, or blouddy knife, o man what haſt thou done,
Thy daughter deare, and onely heyre, hir vitall ende hath wone:
Come fatall blade make lyke diſpatche, come Atropos, come ende,
Strike home thou careles arme with ſp • ede, of death be not afrayde.
Oh noble knight Virginius, do ſtay, he not diſmayde.
I curing Comfort preſent am, your doller to ayde:
Sith ioy is gone, ſith life is deade:
What comfort can there be?
〈◊〉 there is but dee • e diſ •• ire •
I came from Caleed euen the ſame houre,
And Hap was hyred to hackney in hempſtrid,
In hazard he was of riding on beameſtrid,
Then crow crop on thee top hoiſt vp the ſayle,
Then groned their neckes, by the weight of their tayle,
Then dyd C •• m •• x, put theſe three together,
Pays them their paſporte for • lu • tring thither.
Why how now Haphazard, of what doeſt thou ſpeake?
Me thinks in mad ſort thy talke thou deeſt breake,
〈…〉 all in one.