RVLE A WIFE And have a Wife. A COMOEDY. ACTED BY HIS Majesties Servants.
Written by JOHN FLETCHER Gent.
PLeasure attend yee, and about yee sit
The springs of mirth fancy delight and wit
To stirre you up, doe not your looks let fall,
Nor to remembrance our late errors call,
Because this day w'are Spaniards all againe,
The story of our Play, and our Sceane Spaine :
The errors too, doe not for this cause hate,
Now we present their wit and not their state.
Nor Ladies be not angry if you see,
A young fresh beauty, wanton and too free,
Seeke to abuse your Husband, still tis Spaine,
No such grosse errors in your Kingdome raignes,
W'are Vestalls all, and though we blow the fire,
We seldome make it flame up to desire,
Take no example neither to beginne,
For some by president delight to sinne:
Nor blame the Poet if he slip aside,
Sometimes lasciviously if not too wide.
But hold your Fannes close, and then smile at ease,
A cruell Sceane did never Lady please.
Nor Gentlemen, pray be not you di • pleas'd,
Though we present some men fool'd fome diseas'd,
Some drunke, some madde: we meane not you, you'r free,
We taxe no farther then our Comedie,
You are our friends sit noble then and see.
ARe your companies full Coronell?
No not yet sir:
Nor will not be this month yet, as I rec kon.
How rises your commaund?
We pick up still, and as our monies hold out,
We have men come, about that time I thinke
We shall be full too, many young gallants goe.
And unexperienced,
The warres are dainty dreams to young hot spirits,
Time and experience will allay those visions,
We have strange things to fill our numbers,
There's one Don Leon, a strange goodly fellow,
Recommended to me from some noble Friends,
For my Alfores, had you but seen his person,
And what a Giants promise it protesteth.
I have heard of him and that he hath serv'd before too.
But no harm done, nor never meant, Don Michael
That came to my eares yet, aske him a question,
He blushes like a girle, and answers litle,
To the point lesse, he wears a sword a good one,
And good cloaths too, he is whole skin'd, has no hurt yet,
Good promising hopes, I never yet heard certainly
Of any Gentleman that saw him angry.
Preserve him, hee'l conclude a peace if need be,
Many as strong as he will goe along with us,
That sweare as valiantly as heart can wish,
Their mouth charg'd with six oaths at once, and whole ons,
That make the drunken Dutch creepe into mole-hils.
Tis true, such we must looke for, but Michaell Perez,
When heard you of Donna Margaretta, the great heiresse.
I heare every hower of her, though I never saw her,
She is the main discourse, noble Don Iuan de Castro,
How happy were that man cood catch this wench up,
And live at ease, she is faire, and young, and wealthy,
Infinite wealthy, and as gratious too
In all her entertainements, as men report.
But shee is proud sir, that I know for certaine,
And that coms seldome without wantonnesse,
He that shall marry her, must have a rare hand.
Would I were married, I would find that wisdome,
With a light reyne to rule my wife, if ever woman
Of the most subtlest mould went beyond mee,
I would give the boyes leave to whoote me out o'th parish.
Sir there be two gentlewomen attend to speak
With yee.
Wait on them in.
Are they two handsome women?
They seem so, very handsome, but they are vail'd sir.
Thou putst' sugar in my mouth, how it melts with me,
I love a sweet young wench.
Wait on them in I say. Exit serv.
Don Iuan.
How you itch Michaell, how you burnish!
Will not this souldiers heat out of your bones yet,
Doe your eyes glow now?
There be two.
Say honest, what shame have you then.
I would faine see that,
I have been in the Indies twice, & have seen strange things,
But two honest women: one I read of once.
Pre thee be modest.
Ile be any thing.
You are welcome Ladies.
Both hooded, I like um well though,
They come not for advice in law sure heather,
Maybe they would learne to raise the picke,
I am for 'um. They are very modest, tis a fine preludium.
With mee or with this gentleman,
would you speak Lady?
With you sir as I guesse, Iuan de Castro.
Her curtaine opens, she is a pretty gentlewoman.
I am the man, and shall be bound to fortune,
I may doe any service to your beauties.
Captaine, I heare you are marching downe to Flanders,
To serve the Catholick King.
I am sweet Lady.
I have a kinsman and a noble friend,
Imploy'd in those warres, may be sir you know him,
Don Campusano Captaine of Carbines,
To whom I would request your Noblenesse,
To give this poore remembrance. A letter.
I shall doe it,
I know the Gentleman a most worthy Captaine.
Something in private.
Step aside: Ile serve thee. Ex. Iuan. & Clara.
Prethee let me see thy face.
Sir you must pardon me,
Women of our sort that maintaine faire memories,
And keep suspect off from their chastities,
Had neede weare thicker v • iles.
I am no blaster of a Ladies beauty,
Nor bold intruder on her speciall favours,
I know how tender reputation is,
And with what guards it ought to be preserv'd Lady,
You may to me.
You must excuse me Seignior, I come
Not here to sell my selfe.
As I am a Gentleman, by the honour of a souldier •
I beleeve you.
I pray you be civill, I beleeve you would see me,
And when you have seen me, I beleeve you will like me.
But in a strange place, to a stranger too,
As if I came on purpose to betray you,
Indeed I will not.
I shall love you dearely,
And tis a sinne to fling away affection,
I have no Mistresse, no desire to honour
Any but you • will not this oyster open?
I know not, you have struck me with your modesty,
She will draw sure; so deep, and taken from me?
All the desire I might bestow on others;
Quickly before they come.
Indeed I dare not.
But since I see you are so desirous Sir
To view a poore face that can merit nothing
But your repentance.
It must needs be excellent.
And with what honesty you aske it of me.
When I am gone let your man follow me,
And view what house I enter, thither come,
For there I dare be bold to appeare open.
And as I like your vertuous carriage then, Enter Iuan, Cla. a Servant.
I shall be able to give welcome to you,
Shee hath done her businesse, I must take my leave sir.
Ile kisse your faire white hand, and thank ye Lady,
My man shall wait, and I shall be your servant,
Sirrah, come neare, hark.
I shall doe it faithfully. Exit.
You will command me no more services?
To be carefull of your noble health, deare Sir,
That I may ever honour you.
I thank you,
And kisse your hands, wait on the Ladies down there.
You had the honour to see the face that came to you.
And • twas a faire one, what was yours, don Michael ?
Mine was i'th 'clipse, and had a clowd drawn over it
But I believe well, and I hope tis handsome,
Shee had a hand would stirre a holy Hermite.
You know none of um?
No.
Then I doe Captaine,
But ile say nothing till I see the proofe on't,
Sit close Don Perez, or your worship's caught,
I feare a fly.
Were those she brought love letters?
A packet to a kinsman now in Flanders;
Yours was very modest me thought.
Some young unmanag'd thing;
But I may live to see—
Tis worth experience,
Let's walk abroad and view our companies. Exit.
What are you for the wars Alonzo ?
It may be I,
It may be no, e'ne as the humour takes me,
If I finde peace amongst the female creatures,
And easie entertainment, ile stay at home,
I am not so far obliged yet to long marches,
And mouldy biskets to run mad for honour,
When you are all gone I have my choice before me.
Of which hospitall thou wilt sweat in; wilt thou
Never leave whoring?
There is lesse danger in't then gunning Sanchio,
Though we be shot sometimes the shot's not mortall,
Besides it breaks no limbs.
But it disables um,
D'ost thou see how thou pul'st thy legs after thee, as they
Hung by points.
Better to pull um thus then walke on wooden ones,
Serve bravely for a billet to support me.
Fy, fy, tis base.
Do'st thou count it base to suffer?
Suffer abundantly, tis the crowne of honour;
You think it nothing to lie twenty daies
Vnder a surgeons hands that has no mercy.
As thou hast done I am sure but I perceive now
Why you desire to stay, the orient heiresse,
The Margaretta sir.
I would I had hir.
They say she will marry.
Yes, I think she will.
And marry suddenly as report goes too,
She feares hir youth will not hold out Alonzo.
I would I had the sheathing on't.
They say too
Shee has a greedy eye that must be fed
With more then one mans meat.
Would she were mine,
I would cater for her well enough: but Sanchio,
There be too many great men that adore her,
Princes, and Princes fellowes that claime priviledge.
Yet those stand off ith' way of marriage,
To be tied to a mans pleasure is a second labour.
Shee has bought a brave house here in towne.
• have heard so.
If shee convert it now to pious uses,
And bid poore Gentlemen welcome.
When comes shee to it?
Within these two daies, she is in the countrey yet,
And keeps the noblest house.
Then there's some hope of her,
Wilt thou goe my way?
No, no, I must leave you
And repaire to an old Gentlewoman
That has credit with her, that can speak a good word.
Send thee good fortune, but make thy body sound first.
I am a souldier,
And too sound a body becomes me not,
Farewell Sanchio. Exit.
Tis this • or that house, or I have lost mine ayme,
They are both faire buildings, she walked plaguy fast, Ent. Estif.
And hereabouts I lost her, stay, that's she,
Tis very she,—she makes me a low curt'sie,
Let me note the place, the street I well remember. Exit.
She is in againe, certaine some noble Lady,
How happy should I be if she love my Master:
A wondrous goodly house, here are brave lodgings,
And I shall sleep now like an Emperour,
And eat abundantly • I thank my fortune,
Ile back with speed • and bring him happy tidings. Exit.
What should it mean, that in such hast
We are sent for?
Belike the Lady Margaret has some businesse
Shee would break to us in private.
It should seeme so.
Tis a good Lady, and a wise young Lady.
And vertuous enough too I warrant yee
For a yong woman of her yeares: tis pittie
To load her tender age with too much virtue.
Tis more sometimes then we can well away with.
Good morrow Ladies.
Morrow my good Madam.
How does the sweet young beauty, Lady Margaret ?
Has she slept well after her walke last night?
Are her dreames gentle to her minde?
All's well,
Shee's very well, she sent for you thus suddenly
To give hir counsell in a businesse
That much concernes her.
Shee does well and wisely,
To aske the counsell of the ancientst Madame,
Our yeares have run through many things she knows not.
Shee would faine marry.
Tis a proper calling,
And well beseemes her yeares, who would she yoke with?
Thats left to argue on, I pray come in
And break your fast, drink a good cup or two,
To strengthen your understandings, then sheele tell ye.
And good wine breeds good counsell,
Wele yeeld to ye. Exeunt.
Have you seen any service?
Yes.
Where?
Every where.
What office bore yee?
None, I was not worthy.
What Captaines know you?
None, they were above me.
Were you never hurt?
Not that J well remember,
But once J stole a Hen, and then they beat me;
Pray aske me no long questions, J have an ill memory.
This is an Asse, did you never draw your sword yet?
Not to doe any harme I thank heaven for't.
Nor nere tane prisoner?
No, • ran away,
For • had nere no mony to redeeme me.
Can you endure a Drum?
It makes my head ake.
Are you not valiant when you are drunk?
I think not, but I am loving Sir.
What a lump is this man,
Was your Father wise?
Too wise for me • 'me sure,
For he gave all he had to my younger brother.
That was no foolish part ile beare you witnesse.
Canst thou lye with a woman?
I think I could make shift sir,
But I am bashfull.
In the night?
I know not,
Darknesse indeed may doe some good upon me.
Why art thou sent to me to be my officer,
I, and commended too, when thou darst not fight?
There be more officers of my opinion,
Or I am cozend sir, men that talke more too.
How wilt thou scape a bullet?
Why by chance,
They aime at honourable men, alas I am none sir.
This fellow has some doubts in's talk that striks me,
He cannot be all foole: welcome Alonzo.
What have you got there temperance into your co ̄ pany?
The spirit of peace? we shall have warres Ent. Caca.
By th'ounce then, O here's another Pumpion,
Let him loos for luck sake, the cram'd sonne
Of a starv'd Vsurer, Cacafogo, both their brains butterd,
Cannot make two spoonefulls.
My Fathers dead: I am a man of warre too,
Monyes, demeanes; I have ships at sea too,
Captaines.
Take heed o'th Hollanders, your ships may leake else.
I scorne the Hollanders, they are my drunkards.
Put up your gold sir, ile borrow it else.
I am satisfied, you shall not,
Come out, I know thee, meet mine anger instantly.
I never wrong'd yee.
Thou hast wrong'd mine honor,
Thou look'st upon my Mistris thrice lasciviously,
Ile make it good.
Doe not heat your selfe, you will surfeit.
Thou wan'st my mony too, with a pair of base bones,
In whom there was no truth, for which I beat thee,
I beat thee much, now I will hurt thee dangerously.
This shall provoke thee. He strikes.
You struck too low by a foot sir.
You must get a ladder when you would beat
This fellow.
I cannot chuse but kick againe, pray pardon mee.
Hadst thou not ask'd my pardon, I had killd thee,
I leave thee as a thing despis'd, assoles manus a vostra siniare a Maistre. Exit Caca.
You have scap'd by miracle, there is not in all Spaine,
A spirit of more fury then this fire drake.
I see he is hasty, and I would give him leave,
To beat me soundly if he would take my bond.
What shall I doe with this fellow?
Turne him off,
He will infect the campe with cowardice,
If he goe with thee.
About some week hence sir,
If I can hit upon no abler officer,
You shall hear from mee.
I desire no better. Exit.
You have made mee now too bountifull amends, Lady
For your strict carriage when you saw me first,
These beauties were not meant to be conceal'd,
It was a wrong to hide so sweet an object,
I coo'd now chide yee, but it shall be thus,
No other anger ever touch your sweetnesse.
You appeare to mee so honest, and so civill,
Without a blush sir, I dare bid yee welcome.
Now let mee aske your name.
Tis Estifanie, the heire of this poore place.
Poore doe you call it,
There's nothing that I cast mine eyes upon,
But shewes both rich and admirable, all the roomes
Are hung as if a Princesse were to dwell here,
The Gardens, Orchards, every thing so curious:
Is all that plate your owne too?
Tis but litle,
Only for present use, I have more and richer,
When need shall call, or friends compell me use it,
The sutes you see of all the upper chambers,
Are those that commonly adorne the house,
I think I have besides, as faire as civill •
Or any towne in Spaine can paralell.
Now if she be not married, I have some hopes,
Are you a maide?
You make me blush to answer,
I ever was accounted so to this hower,
And that's the reason that I live retir'd sir.
Then would I counsell you to marry presently,
If I can get her, I am made for ever,
For every yeare you loose, you loose a beauty,
A husband now an honest carefull husband,
Were such a comfort, will ye walke above staires.
This place will fit our talke, tis fitter farre sir,
Above there are day-beds, and such temptations
I dare not trust sir.
She is excellent wise withall too.
You nam'd a husband, I am not so strict sir,
Nor ti'de unto a Virgins solitarinesse,
But if an honest, and a noble one,
Rich, and a souldier, for so I have vowed he shall be,
Were offer'd mee, I think I should accept him,
But above all he must love.
He were base else,
There's comfort ministred in the word soldier,
How sweetly should I live.
I am not so ignorant, but that I know well,
How to be commanded,
And how againe to make my selfe obeyd sir,
I wast but litle, I have gather'd much,
My riall not the lesse worth, when tis spent,
If spent by my direction, to please my husband,
I hold it as indifferent in my duty,
To be his maid i'th kitchin, or his Cook,
As in the Hall to know my selfe the Mistris.
Sweet, Rich, and provident, now fortune stick
To mee; I am a souldier, and a batchilour, Lady,
And such a wife as you, I cood love infinitely,
They that use many words, some are deceitfull,
I long to be a husband, and a good one,
For tis most certaine I shall make a president
For all that follow me to love their Ladies,
I am young you see, able I would have you think too,
If't please you know, try me before you take mee,
'Tis true I shall not meet in equall wealth
With ye, but Iewels, Chaines, such as the warre
Has given mee, a thousand duckets I dare
Presume on in ready gold, now as your
Care may handle it, as rich cloths too, as
Any he bears armes Lady.
You are a true gentleman, and faire, I see by yee,
And such a man I had rather take.
Pray doe so, ile have a Priest o'th sudden.
And as suddenly you will repent too.
Ile be hang'd or drown'd first,
By this and this, and this kisse.
You are a Flatterer,
But I must say there was something when • saw you.
First, in that most noble face, that stirr'd my fancy.
Ile stirre it better ere you sleepe sweet Lady,
Ile send for all my trunks and give up all to yee,
Into your owne dispose, before I bed yee,
And then sweet wench.
You have the art to cozen mee. Exeunt.
Sit downe and give me your opinions seriously.
You say you have a mind to marry Lady.
Tis true, I have for to preserve my credit,
Yet not so much for that as for my state Ladies,
Conceave me right, there lies the maine o'th question,
Credit I can redeeme, mony will imp it,
But when my monie's gone, when the law shall
Ceaze that, and for incontinency strip me
Of all.
Doe you finde your body so malitious that way.
I finde it as all bodies are that are young and lusty,
Lazy, and high fed, I desire my pleasure •
And pleasure I must have.
'Tis fit you should have,
Your years require it, and 'tis necessary,
As necessary as meat to a young Lady,
Sleep cannot nourish more.
But might not all this be, & keep ye single.
You take away variety in marriage,
The abundance of the pleasure you are bar'd then,
I'st not abundance that you aime at.
Yes why was I made a woman.
And every day a new?
Why faire and young but to use it.
You are still i'th right, why would you marry then.
Because a husband stops all doubts in this point,
And cleers all passages.
What husband mean yee.
A husband of an ea • y faith a foole,
Made by her wealth, and moulded to her pleasure,
One though he see himselfe become a monster,
Shall hold the doore, and entertaine the maker.
You grant there may be such a man.
Yes marry, but how to bring um to this rare Perfection.
They must be chosen so, things of no honour,
Nor outward honesty.
No 'tis no matter,
I care not what they are, so they be lusty.
Me thinks now a rich Lawyer, some such fellow,
That carries credit, and a face of awe,
But lies with nothing but his clients businesse.
No ther's no trusting them, they are too subtill,
The Law has moulded 'um of naturall mischiefe.
Then some grave governo • ,
Some man of honour, yet an easy man.
If he have honour I am undone, ile none such,
Ile have a lusty man, honour will cloy mee.
Tis fit ye should Lady;
And to that end, with search and wit and labour,
I have found one out, a right one and a perfect,
He is made as strong as brasse, is of brave years too,
And doubty of complexion.
Is he a Gentleman?
Yes and a So • ldier, as gentle as you would wish him,
A good fellow, wears good cloaths.
Those ile allow him,
They are for my credit, does he understand,
But litle?
Very litle.
Tis the better.
Has not the war • es • red him up to anger?
No, he will not quarrell with a dog that bites him,
Let him be drunke or sober, is one silence.
Has no capacity what honour is?
For that's the souldiers god.
Honor's a thing too subtill for his wisdome •
If honour lye in eating, he is right honorable.
Is he so goodly a man doe you say?
As you shall see Lady,
But to all this is but a trunke.
I would have him so,
I shall adde branches to him to adorne him,
Goe, finde me out this man, and le • me see him,
If he be that motion that you tell me of,
And make no more noise, I shall entertaine him,
Let him be here.
He shall attend your Ladiship. Exeunt.
Why thou art not married indeed.
No, no, pray think so,
Alas I am a fellow of no reckoning,
Not worth a Ladies eye.
Woodst thou steale a fortune,
And make none of all thy friends acquainted with it •
Nor bid us to thy wedding.
No indeed,
There was no wisdome in't, to bid an Artist,
An old seducer to a femall banquet,
I can cut up my pye without your instructions.
Was it the wench i'th vaile.
Basto 'twas she,
The prettiest rogue that ere you look'd upon,
The lovingst theefe.
And is she rich withall too.
A mine, a mine, there is no end of wealth Coronell.
I am an asse, a bashfull foole, prethee Coronell,
How doe thy companies fill now.
You are merry sir,
You intend a safer warre at home belike now.
I doe not think I shall fight much this year Coro nell,
I finde my selfe given to my ease a litle,
I care not if I sell my foolish company,
They are things of hazard.
How it angers mee,
This fellow at first sight should win a Lady,
A rich young wench, and I that have consum'd
My time and art in searching out their subtleties,
Like a fool'd Alchimist blow up my hopes still,
When shall we come to thy house and be freely merry.
When I have manag'd hir a litle more,
I have a house to entertaine an army.
If thy wife be faire, thou wilt have few lesse
Come to thee.
But where they'l get entertainment is the point Sinior.
I beat no drum.
You need none but her taber,
May be ile march after a month or two,
To get mee a fresh stomack, I find Coronell
A wantonnesse in wealth, methinks I agree not with,
Tis such a trouble to be married too,
And have a thousand things of great importance,
Iewells and plates, and fooleries molest mee,
To have a mans brains whimsied with his wealth:
Before I walk'd contentedly.
My Mistris sir is sick, because you are absent,
She mournes and will not eate.
Alas my Iewell,
Come ile goe with thee, gentlemen your faire leaves,
You see I am tide a litle to my yoke,
Pray pardon mee, would ye had both such loving wives.
I thank yee Exit. Perez Serv.
For your old bootes, never be blank Alonzo,
Because this fellow has out stript thy fortune,
Tell me ten daies hence what he is, and how
The gratious state of matrimony stands with him,
Come, lets to dinner, when Margarita comes
Wee'l visit both, it may be then your fortune. Exeunt.
Is he come?
Yes Madame, has been here this halfe houre,
I have question'd him of all that you can aske him,
And finde him as fit as you had made the man,
He will make the goodliest shadow for iniquity.
Have ye searcht him Ladies?
Is a man at all points, a likely man.
Call him in Altea. Exit Lady.
A man of a good presence, pray ye come this way,
Of a lusty body, is his mind soo • ame.
Pray ye question him, and if you finde him not
Fit for your purpose, shake him off, there's no harme Done.
Can you love a young Lady? How he blushes.
Leave twirling of your hat, & hold your head up,
And speak to'th Lady.
Yes, I think I can,
I must be taught, I know not what it meanes Madam.
You shall be taught, and can you when she pleases
Goe ride abroad, and stay a week or two?
You shall have men and horses to attend ye,
And mony in your purse.
Yes I love riding,
And when I am from home I am so merry.
Be as merry as you will: can you as hansomely
When you are sent for back, come with obedience,
And doe your dutie to the Ladie loves you?
Yes sure, I shall.
And when you see her friends here,
Or noble kinsmen, can you entertaine
Their servants in the Celler, and be busied,
And hold your peace, what ere you see or heare of.
Twere fit I were hang'd else.
Let me try your kisses,
How the foole shakes, I will not eat ye sir,
Beshrew my heart he kisses wondrous manly,
Can ye doe any thing else?
Indeed I know not;
But if your Ladiship will please to instruct me,
Sure I shall learne.
You shall then be instructed;
If I should be this Lady that affects yee,
Nay say I marry yee?
Harke to the Lady.
What money have yee?
None Madam, nor friends,
I wood doe any thing to serve your Ladiship.
You must not look to be my M r Sir,
Nor talk ith house as though you wore the breeches,
No, nor command in any thing.
I will not.
Alas I am not able, I have no wit Madam.
Nor doe not labour to arrive at any,
Twill spoile your head I take ye upon charity •
And like a servant ye must be unto me,
As I behold your duty I shall love ye,
And as you observe me, I may chance lye with ye,
Can you mark these.
Yes indeed forsooth.
There is one thing,
That if I take ye in I put ye from me,
Vtterly from me, you must not be sawcy,
No, nor at any time familiar with me,
Scarce know me, when I call ye not.
J will not, alas I never knew my selfe sufficiently.
Nor must not now.
Ile be a dog to please ye.
Indeed you must fetch and carry as I appoint ye.
I were too • lame else.
Kisse me ag • n; a strong fellow,
There is a vigor in his lips: if you see me
Kisse any other, twenty in an houre sir,
You must not start, nor be offended.
No, if you kisse a thousand I shall be contented,
It will the better teach me how to please ye.
I told ye Madam,
Tis the man I wisht for; the lesse you speak.
Ile never speak againe Madam,
But when you charge me, then ile speak softly too.
Get me a Priest, ile wed him instantly,
But when you are married sir, you must wait
Vpon me, and see you observe my lawes.
Else you shall hang me.
Ile give ye better clothes when you deserve um,
Come in, and serve for witnesses.
We shall Madam.
And then away to'th citty presently,
Ile to my new house and new company.
A thousand crownes are thine, & I am a made man.
Doe not break out too soone.
I know my time wench. Exeunt.
What have you caught him?
Yes.
And doe you finde him
A man of those hopes that you aim'd at?
Yes too,
And the most kinde man • and the ablest also
To give a wife content, he is sound as old wine,
And to his soundnesse rises on the pallat,
And there's the man; I finde him rich too Clara.
Hast thou married him.
What dost thou think I fish without a bait wench?
I bob for fooles? he is mine own I have him,
I told thee what would tickle him like a trout,
And as I cast it so I caught him daintily,
And all he has I have • stow'd at my devotion.
Does thy Lady know this? she is comming now to towne,
Now to live here in this house.
Let her come,
She shall be welcome, I am prepar'd for hir,
She is mad sure if she be angry at my fortune,
For what I have made bold.
Dost thou not love him?
Yes, intirely well,
As long as there he staies and looks no farther
Into my ends, but when he doubts, I hate him,
And that wise hate will teach me how to cozen him,
How to decline their wives, and curb their manners,
To put a sterne and strong reyne to their natures,
And holds he is an Asse not worth acquaintance,
That cannot mould a divell to obedience,
I owe him a good turne for these opinions,
And as I finde his temper I may pay him. Enter Perez.
O here he is, now you shall see a kinde man.
My Estifania, shall we to dinner lambe,
I know thou staist for me.
I cannot eat else.
I never enter but me thinks a Paradice
Appeares about me.
You are welcome to it Sir.
I think I have the sweetest seat in Spaine wench,
Me thinks the richest too, weele eat ith garden
In one o'th arbours, there tis coole and pleasant,
And have our wine cold in the running fountain
Who's that?
A friend of mine Sir.
Of what breeding?
A Gentlewoman Sir.
What businesse has she?
Is shee a learned woman i'th Mathematicks,
Can shee tell fortunes?
More then I know Sir.
Or has she ere a letter from a kinswoman,
That must be delivered in my absence wife,
Or comes she from the Doctor to salute ye,
And learne your health, she looks not like a confessor.
What need all this, why are you troubled Sir.
What doe you suspect, she cannot • uckold ye,
Shee is a woman Sir, a very woman.
Your very woman may doe very well Sir
Toward the matter, for though she cannot performe it
In her own person, she may doe it by Proxie,
Your rarest jugglers work still by conspiracy.
Cry ye mercy husband, you are jealous then,
And happily suspect me.
No indeed wife.
Me thinks you should not till you have more cause
And cleerer too: I am sure you have heard say husband,
A woman forced will free her selfe through iron,
A happy, calme, and good wife discontented
May be taught tricks.
No, no, I doe but jest with ye.
To morrow friend ile see you.
I shall leave ye
Till then, and pray all may goe sweetly with ye. Exit.
Why where's this girle, whose at the doore. Knock.
Who knocks there?
Is't for the king ye come, you knock so boisterously?
Look to the doore. Enter maid.
My Lady, as I live Mistris, my Ladie's come,
Shee's at the doore, I peept through, & I saw her,
And a stately company of Ladies with her.
This was a week too soon, but I must meet with her,
And set a new wheele going, and a subtile one,
Must blind this mighty Mars, or I am ruin'd.
What are they at doore?
Such my Michael
As you may bles • e the day they enter'd here,
Such for our good.
Tis well.
Nay, 'twill be better
If you will let me but dispose the businesse,
And be a stranger to it, and not disturb me,
What have I now to doe but to advance your fortune.
Doe, I dare trust thee, I am asham'd I am angry,
I finde thee a wise young wife.
Ile wise your worship
Before I leave ye, pray ye walk by and say nothing,
Only salute him, and leave the rest to me Sir,
I was borne to make ye a man.
The rogue speaks heartily,
Her good will colours in her cheeks, I am borne to love her.
I must be gentler to these tender natures,
A souldiers rude harsh words befit not Ladies,
Nor must we talke to them as we talk to
Our Officers, ile give her way, for tis for me she
Works now, I am husband, heire, and all she has.
Who are these, what • lanting things, a woman
Of rare presence, excellent faire, this is too big
For a bawdy house, too open seated too.
My husband Lady.
You have gain'd a proper man.
What ere I am, I am your servant Lady. kisses.
Sir, be rul'd now,
And I shall make ye rich, this is my cozen,
That Gentleman dotes on her, even to death, see how he ob serves her.
She is a goodly woman.
She is a mirrour,
But she is poore, she were for a Princes side else,
This house she has brought him too as to hir own,
And presuming upon me, and upon my curtesie,
Conceive me short, he knowes not but she is wealthy,
Or if she did know otherwise, 'twere all one,
He is so far gone.
Forward, she has a rare face.
This we must carry with discretion husband,
And yeeld unto her for foure daies.
Yeeld our house up, our goods and wealth.
All this is but in seeming
To milke the lover on, doe you see this writing,
200 a yeare when they are married,
Has she sealed too for our good; the time's unfit now,
Ile shew it you to morrow.
All the house.
All, all, and weele remove too, to confirme him.
They'le into 'th country suddenly agen
After they are matcht, and then sheele open to him.
The whole possession wife, look what you doe,
A part o'th house.
No, no, they shall have all,
And take their pleasure too, tis • or our 'vantage,
Why, whats foure daies, had you a sister sir,
A Neece or Mistris that required this curtesie,
And should I make a • cruple to doe you good?
If easily it would come back.
I sweare Sir,
As easily as it came on, ist not pitty
To let such a Gentlewoman for a little help,
You give away no house.
Cleere but that question.
Ile put the writings into your hand.
Well then.
And you shall keep them safe.
I am satisfied; wood I had the wench so too •
When she has marr • ed him,
So infinite his love is linckt unto hir,
You, I, or any one that helps at this pinch
May have heaven knowes what.
Ile remove the goods streight,
And take some poore house by, tis but for foure daies.
I have a poore old friend; there weele be.
Tis well then.
Goe handsome off, and leave the house cleere.
Well.
That litle stuffe weele use shall follow after;
And a boy to guide ye, peace and we are made both.
Come, let's goe in, are all the roomes kept sweet wench.
They are sweet and neat. Exit Per.
Why where's your husband?
Gone Madam.
When you come to your own he must give place Lady.
Well, send you joy, you would not let me know • t,
Yet I shall not forget ye.
Thank your Ladyship. Exeunt.
Are you at ease now, is your heart at rest,
Now you have got a shadow, an umbrella
To keep the scorching worlds opinion
From your faire credit.
I am at peace Altea.
If he continue but the same he shewes,
And be a master of that ignorance
He outwardly professes, I am happy,
The pleasure I shall live in and the freedome
Without the squint-eye of the law upon me,
Or prating liberty of tongues, that envy.
You are a made woman.
But if he should prove now
A crafty and dissembling kind of husband,
One read in knavery, and brought up in the art
Of villany conceal'd.
My life, an Innocent.
That's it I ayme at,
That's it I hope too, then I am sure I rule him,
For Innocents are like obedient children
Brought up under a hard mother in law, a cruel,
Who being not us'd to break-fasts & collations,
When they have course bread offerd um, are thankfull,
And take it for a favour too, are the roomes
Made ready to entertaine my friends, I long to dance now
And to be wanton; let me have a song, is the great couch up,
The Duke of Medina sent?
Tis up and ready.
And day beds in all chambers?
In all Lady,
Your house is nothing now but various pleasures
The Gallants begin to gaze too.
Let um gaze on,
I was brought up a Courtier, high and happy,
And company is my delight, and courtship,
And hansome servants at my wil, where's my good husband •
Where does he wait?
He knowes his distance Madam,
I warrant ye, he is busie in the celler
Amongst his fellow servants, or asleep,
Till your command awake him.
Tis well Altea. Enter Leon.
It should be so, my ward I must preserve him,
Who sent for him, how dare he come uncall'd for,
His bonnet on too.
Sure he sees you not.
How scornefully he lookes.
Are all the chambers
Deckt and adorn'd thus for my Ladies pleasure,
New hangings every houre for entertainment •
And new plate bought, new jewels to give lustre.
They are, and yet there must be more and richer,
It is her will.
Hum, is it so, tis excellent,
It is her will too, to have feasts and banquets,
Revells and masques •
She ever lov'd um dearely,
And we shall have the bravest housekept n • w sir,
I must not call ye master she has warn'd mee •
Nor must not put my hat off to ye.
Tis no fashion,
What though I be hir husband, I am your fellow,
I may cut first.
That's as you shall dese • ve sir.
And when I lye with her.
May be ile light yee.
On the same point you may doe mee that service.
Madame, the Duke Medina with some captaines
Will come to dinner, and have • en • are wine,
And their best services.
They shall be welcome,
See all be ready in the noblest fashion,
The house perfum'd, now I shall take my pleasure,
And not my neighbour Iustice maunde • at mee,
Goe, get your best cloths on, but till I call yee,
Be sure you be not seene, dine with the gen • lewomen,
And behave your selfe cleanly sir, tis for my credit.
Madame, the Lady Iulia.
That's a bawde,
A three pild bawde, bawde major to the army.
Ha • brought her coach to wait upon your Ladiship,
And to be inform'd if you will take the air • this morning.
The neat aire of hir nunnery.
Tell her no, i'th afternoone Ile call on hir.
I will Madame. Exit.
Why are not you gone to prepare your selfe,
May be you shall be sewer to the first course,
A portly presence, Alten he looks leane,
Tis a wash knave, he will not keep his flesh well.
A willing, madame • one that needs no spurring.
Faith madame, in my litle understanding,
You had better entertaine your honest neighbours •
Your friends about yee, that may speak well of yee,
And give a worthy m • ntion of yo • r bounty.
How now what's this?
Tis only to perswade yee,
Courtiers are but tickle things to deale withall,
A kind of march-pane men that will not last Madame,
An egge and pepper goes farther then their potions,
And in a well built body • a poore parsnip
Will play his prize, above their strong potabiles.
The fellowes mad.
H • that shall counsell Ladies,
That have both licorish and ambitious eyes,
I • either • ad, or d • unke, let him speake Gospell.
He breaks out modestly.
Pray ye be not angry,
My indiscretion has made bold to tell yee,
What youl find true.
Thou darest not • alke.
Not much Madame,
You have a tye upon your servants tongue,
He dares not be so bold as reason bids him,
'Twere fit there were a stronger on your temper,
Nere look so sterne upon me I am your husband,
But what are husbands, read the new worlds wonders,
Such husbands as this monstrous world produces,
And you will scarce finde such deformities,
They are shadowes to conceale your veniall vertues,
Sailes to your mills, th • t grinde with all occasions,
Balls that lye by you, to wash out your staines,
And bills naild up with horne before your stories,
To rent out last.
Doe you hear him talke?
I have done Madame,
An oxe once spoke, as learned men deliver,
Shortly I shall be such, then Ile speak wonders,
Till when I tye my selfe to my obedience. Exit.
First ile untye my selfe, did you mark the Gentlema ̄ ,
How boldly and how sawsily he talkd,
And how unlike the lumpe I took him for,
The peece of ignorant dowe, he stood up to me
And mated my commands, this was your providence,
Your wisdome, to elect this gentleman,
Your excellent forecast in the man, your knowledge,
What think ye now.
I think him an asse still,
This boldnesse some of your people have blowne
Into him, this wisdome too with strong wine,
'Tis a Tirant, and a Philosopher also, and findes
Out reasons.
Ile have my celler lockt, no schoole kept there •
Nor no discovery • Ile t • rne my drunkards,
Such as are understanding in their draughts,
And dispute learnedly the whyes and wherefores,
To grasse immediatly, Ile keep all fool • s,
Sober or drunk, still fooles • that shall know nothing,
Nothing belongs to mankind, but obedie • ce,
And such a hand ile keep over this husband.
He will fall againe, my life he eryes • y this time,
Keep him from drink, he has a hye constitution.
Shall I weare my new su • e Madame?
No your old clothes •
And get you into the country presently,
And see my hawkes well train'd, you shall have victualls,
Such as are fit for sawcy pallats sir,
And lodgings with the hindes it is to good too.
Good madame be not so rough, with repenta •• e,
You see now he's come roun'd agen.
I see not what I expect to see.
You shall see Madame, if it shall please your Lady ship.
Hee's humbled,
Forgive good Lady.
Well goe get you handsome,
And let me heare no more.
Have ye yet no feeling,
Ile pinch ye to the bones then my proud Lady. Exit.
See you preserve him thus upon my favour,
You know his temper, tye him to the grindstone,
The next rebellion Ile be rid of him,
Ile have no needy rascalls, I tye to me,
Dispute my life, come in and see all handsome.
I hope to see you so too, I have wrought ill else. Exit.
Shall I never returne to mine owne house againe,
We are lodg'd here in the miserablest dog-hole,
A conjurers circle gives content above it,
A hawks mew is a princely pallace to it,
We have a bed no bigger then a basket,
And there we lye like butter clapt together,
And sweat our selves to sawee immediatly,
The fumes are Infinite inhabit here too;
And to that so thick, they c • t like marmalette,
So various too, they'l pose a gold finder,
Never returne to mine own paradise?
Why wife I say, why Estifa • ia.
within. I am going presently.
Make hast good jewell,
I am like the people that live in the sweet Ilands:
I dye I dye if I stay but one day more here,
My lungs are rotten with the damps that rise,
And I cough nothing now but stinks of all sorts,
The inhabitants we have are two starv'd rats,
For they are not able to maintain a cat here,
And those appeare as fearfull as two divells,
They have eat a map of the whole world up already,
And if we stay a night we are gone for company,
Ther's an old woman that's now grown to marble,
Dri'd in this brick hill, and she sits i'th chimnie,
Which is but three tiles rais'd like a house of cards,
The true proportion of an old smok'd Sibill,
There is a young thing too that nature meant
For a maid servant, but tis now a monster,
She has a huske about hir like a chesnut
With basinesse, and living under the line here,
And these two make a hollow sound together,
Like froggs or winds between two doores that murmur •
Mercy deliver mee, o are you come wife,
Shall we be free agen.
I am now going,
And you shall presently to your own house sir,
The remembrance of this small vexation,
Will be argument of mirth for ever:
By that time you have said your orisons,
And broke your fast, I shall be back and ready,
To usher you to your old content, your freedome.
Break my neck rather, is there any thing here to eat
But one another, like a race of Canniballs,
A peece of butter'd wall you think is excellent,
Let's have our house agen immediatly,
And pray yee take heed unto the furniture,
None be imbesseld.
Not a pinne I warrant yee.
And let um instantly depart.
They shall both,
There's reason in all curtesies they must both,
For by this time I know she has acquainted him,
And has provided too she sent me word sit,
And will give over gratefully unto you.
Ile walke i'th Church-yard,
The dead cannot offend more then these living,
An houre hence Ile expect ye.
Ile not faile sir.
And doe you heare, let's have a handsome dinner,
And see all things be decent as they have been,
And let me have a strong bath to restore mee,
I stink like a stall-fish shambles, or an oile shop.
You shall have all, which some interpret nothing,
Ile send ye people for the trunks afore hand,
And for the s • uffe.
Let um be known and honest,
And doe my service to your neece.
I shall sir,
But if I come not at my hower come thither,
That they may give you thanks for your faire curtesy,
And pray ye be brave for my sake.
I observe ye. Exeunt.
Thou art very brave.
I have reason, I have mony.
Is mony reason.
Yes and ruine too Captaine,
If ye have no mony y'ar an asse.
I thank ye.
Ye have meaner, ever thank him that has mony.
Wilt thou lend mee any?
Not a far thing Captaine,
Captaines are casuall things.
Why so are all men, thou shalt have my bond.
Nor bonds nor fetters Captaine,
My mony is mine owne, I make no doubt on't.
What dost thou doe with it?
Put it to pious uses,
Buy wine and wenches, and undoe young coxcombs,
That would undoe mee.
Are those hospitalls?
I first provide to fill my hospitalls,
With creatures of mine owne that I know wretched,
And then I build, those are more bound to pray for mee,
Besides I keep th'inheritance in my name still.
A provident charity, are you for the warres sir?
I am not poore enough to be souldier,
Nor have I faith enough to ward a bullet.
This is no lineing for a trench I take it.
Ye have said wisely.
Had you but my mony,
You would sweare it Coronell, I had rather drill at home,
A hundred thousand crownes, and with more honour,
Then exercise ten thousand fooles with nothing,
A Wise man safely feeds, fooles cut their fingers.
A right state-usurer, why dost thou not marry,
And live a reverend Iustice.
Is't not nobler to command a reverent Iustice, then to be one,
And for a wife, what need I marry Captaine,
When every courteous foole, that owes me mony.
Owes me his wife too, to appease my fury.
Wilt thou goe to dinner with us.
I will goe, and view the pearle of Spaine, the orient
Faire one, the rich one too, and I will be respected,
I beare my patent here, I will talke to her,
And when your Captaines ships shall stand a loose,
And pick your noses, I will pick the purse,
Of hir affection.
The Duke dines there to day too, the Duke of Me dina.
Let the King dine there,
He owes me mony, and so farre's my creature,
And certainly I may make bold with mine own Captain.
Thou wilt eate monstrously.
Like a true borne Spaniard,
Eate as I were in England where the beefe growes,
And I will drink aboundantly and then,
Talke ye as wantonly as Ovid did,
To stirre the intellectualls of the Ladies,
I learnt it of my Fathers amorous Scrivener.
If we should play now, you must supply mee.
You must pawne a horse troope,
And then have at ye Coronell.
Come let's goe.
This rascall will make rare sport, how the Ladies
Will laugh him, leave ager.
If I light on him ile make his purse sweat too.
Will ye lead gentlemen. Exeunt.
Nay pray ye come out, and let me understand ye,
And tune your pipe a litle higher Lady,
Ile hold ye fast: rub, how came my trunks open,
And my goods gone, what picklock spirit.
Ha what would ye have?
My goods agen, how came my trunks all open.
Are your trunks open?
Yes and cloths gone,
And chaines, and Iewels, how she smels like hung bee • e,
The palsy and picklocks, fy how she belches,
The spirit of garlick.
Where's your gentlewoman?
The young faire woman.
What's that to my question,
She is my wife: and gone about my businesse.
Is she your wife sir.
Yes sir, is that wonder;
Is the name of wife unknown here.
Is she truely, truely your wife.
I think so for I married her,
It was no vision sure.
She has the keyes sir,
I know she has, but who has all my goods spirit.
If you be married to that Gentlewoman,
You are a wretched man, she has twenty husbands.
She tells you true.
And she has cozend all sir.
The Divell she has, I had a faire house with her,
That stands hard by, and furnisht roially.
You are cozend too, tis none of hirs good gentle man,
It is a Ladies, what's the Ladies name wench.
The Lady Margarita, she was her servant
And kept the house, but going from her sir,
For some lewd tricks she plaid.
Plague a the Divell,
Am I i'th full Meridian of my wisdome
Cheated by a stale queane, what kinde of Lady
Is that that owes the house?
A young sweet Lady.
Of a low stature?
She is indeed but litle, but she is wondrous faire •
I feele I am cozend.
Now I am sensible I am undone,
This is the very woman sure, that cozen
She told me would entreat but for foure daies,
To make the house hirs, I am intreated sweetly.
When she went out this morning, that I saw Sir,
Shee had two women at the doore attending,
And there she gave um things, and loaded um,
But what they were, I heard your trunks to open,
If they be yours.
They were mine while they are laden,
But now they have cast their calves, they are not worth
Owning, was she hir Mistris say you?
Her own Mistris, her very Mistris, Sir, and all you saw
About, and in that house was hirs.
No plate, no jewels, nor no hangings?
Not a farthing, shee is poore, sir, a poore shifting thing,
No money?
Abominable poore, as poore as we are,
Money as rare to her unlesse she steale it.
But for one civill gowne hir Lady gave hir,
Shee may goe bare good Gentlewoman.
I am mad now,
I think I am as poore as she, I am wide else,
One civill sute I have left too, and that's all,
And if she steale that she must flea me for it,
Where does she use?
You may finde truth as soone,
Alas a thousand conceal'd corners sir, shee lurks in,
And here she gets a fleece, and there another,
And lives in mists and smoakes where none can finde her.
Is shee a whore too?
Litle better Gentleman, I dare not say shee is so sir, because
She is yours, sir, but these 5 yeares she has firkt
A pretty living,
Vntill she came to serve; I feare he will knock my
Braines out for lying.
She has serv'd me faithfully,
A whore, and a theefe, two excellent morrall learnings
In one she Saint, I hope to see her legend.
Have I been fear'd for my discoveries,
And courted by all women to conceale um,
Have I so long studied the art of this sex,
And read the warnings to young Gentlemen:
Have I profest to tame the pride of Ladies,
And make um beare all tests, and am I trickt now,
Caught in myne own nooze, here's a royall left yet,
Theres for your lodging and your meat for this week.
A silk-worme lives at a more plentifull ordinary,
And sleeps in a sweeter box, farewell great grandmother,
If I doe finde you were an accessary,
Tis but the cutting off too smoakie minutes.
Ile hang ye presently.
And I deserve it, I tell but truth.
Nor I, I am an asse mother. Exeunt.
A goodly house.
And richly furnisht too Sir.
Hung wantonly, I like that preparation,
It stirres the bloud unto a hopefull banquet,
And intimates the Mistris free and joviall,
I love a house where pleasure prepares welcome.
Now Cacafogo, how like you this mansion,
Twere a brave pawne.
I shall be master of it,
Twas built for my bulk, the roomes are wide and spacious,
Ayerie, and full of ease, and that I love well,
Ile tell you when I tast the wine my Lord,
And take the heighth of hir table with my stomack,
How my affections stand to the young Lady.
All welcome to your Grace, and to these souldiers,
You honour my poore house with your faire presence •
Those few slight pleasures that inhabit here sir,
I doe beseech your Grace command, they are yours;
Your servant but preserves um to delight ye,
I thank ye Lady, I am bold to visit ye.
Once more to blesse mine eyes with your sweet beauty,
Tas been a long night since you left the Court,
For till I saw you now, no day broke to me.
Bring in the Dukes meat.
She is most excellent.
Most admirable faire as ere I looked on,
I had rather command her then my regiment.
Ile have a fling, tis but a thousand Duckets,
Which I can cozen up agen in ten daies,
And some few jewels to justifie my knavery,
Say J should marry her, sheele get more mony
Then all my usurie, put my knavery to it,
Shee appeares the most unfallible way of purchase,
I cood wish her a size or two stronger, for the incounter,
For I am like a Lyon where I lay hold,
But these Lambs will endure a plaguie load,
And never bleat neither, that sir, time has taught us.
I am so vertuous now, I cannot speak to her,
The arrant'st shame fac'd a • se, I broile away too.
Why where's this dinner?
Tis not ready Madam,
Nor shall not be untill I know the guests too,
Nor are they fairely welcome till I bid um.
Is not this my Alferese he looks another thing, •
Are miracles a foot againe?
Why sirra, why sirra you.
I heare you saucy woman,
And as you are my wife command your absence,
And know your duty, tis the crowne of modesty.
Your wife?
Yes good my Lord, I am her husband,
And pray take notice that I claime that honour,
And will maintaine it.
If thou beest her husband,
I am determin'd thou shall be my Cuckold,
Ile be thy faithfull friend.
Peace durt and dunghill,
I will not loose my anger on a rascall,
Provoke me more, ile beat thy blowne body
Till thou reboundst agen like a Tennis ball.
This is miraculous.
Is this the fellow
That had the patience to become a foole,
A flurted foole, and on a sudden break,
As if he would • hew a wonder to the world •
Both into bravery, and fortune too,
I much admire the man, J am astonisht.
Ile be divorced immediatly
You shall not.
You shall not have so much will to be wicked.
I am more tender of your honour Lady,
And of your age, you took me for a shadow.
You took me to glosse over your discr • dit,
To be your foole, you had thought you had found a coxcomb;
I am innocent of any foule dishonour I meane to ye,
Only I will be knowne to be your Lord now,
And be a faire one too, or I will fall for't.
I doe command ye from me thou poore fellow,
Thou cozen'd foole.
Thou cozen'd foole, tis not so,
I will not be commanded: I am above ye:
You may divorce me from your favour Lady,
But from your state you never shall, ile hold that,
And hold it to my use, the law allowes it,
And then maintaine your wantonnesse Ile wink at it.
Am I braved thus in mine own house.
Tis mine Madam,
You are deceav'd I am Lord of it, I rule it and all that's in't,
You have nothing to doe here Madam,
But as a servant to sweep clean the lodgings,
And at my farther will to doe me service,
And so ile keep it.
As you love mee give way.
It shall be better,
I will give none Madame,
I stand upon the ground of mine own honour
And will maintaine it, you shall know me now,
To be an understanding feeling man,
And sensible of what a woman aimes at,
A young proude woman that has will to saile with,
An itching woman, that her blood provokes too,
I cast my cloude off and appeare my selfe,
The master of this litle peece of mischiefe,
And I will put a spell about your feet Lady,
They shall not wander but where I give way now.
Is this the fellow that the people pointed at,
For the meere signe of man, the walking image,
He speaks wondrous highly.
As a husband ought sir,
In his owne house, and it becomes me well too,
I think your grace would grieve if you were put to it,
To have a wife or servant of your owne,
For wives are reckon'd in the ranke of servants,
Vnder your own roofe to command ye.
Brave, a strange convertion, thou shalt lead
In chiefe now.
Is there no difference betwixt hir and you sir.
Not now Lord, my Fortune makes me even,
And as I am an honest man, I am nobler.
Get me my coach.
Let me see who dare get it
Till I command, ile make him draw your coach too,
And eat your Coach, (which will be hard diet)
That executes your will; or take your coach Lady,
I give you liberty, and take your people.
Which I turne off, and take your will abroad with ye,
Take all these freely, but take me no more,
And so farewell.
Nay sir you shall not carry it
So bravely off, you shall not wrong a Lady
In a high huffing straine, and think to beare it,
We stand not by as bawds to your brave fury,
To see a Lady weepe.
They are teares of anger, I beseech ye note um not worth pitty,
Wrung from her rage, because her will prevailes not,
She would sownd now if she could not cry,
Else they were excellent and I should grieve too,
But falling thus, they show nor sweet nor orient,
Put up my Lord, this is oppression,
And calls the sword of Iustice to releeve mee,
The Law to lend her hand, the king to right me,
All which shall understand how you provoke mee,
In mine own house to brave mee, is this princely,
Then to my guard, and if I spare your Grace,
And doe not make this place your monument,
Too rich a tombe for such a rude behaviour,
I have a cause will kill a thousand of ye, mercy for sake me.
Hold faire sir I beseech ye,
The Gentleman but pleads his own right nobly.
He that dares strike against the husbands freedome,
The husbands curse stick to him, a tam'd cuckold,
His wife be faire and young, but most dishonest,
Most impudent, and have no feeling of it,
No conscience to reclaime her from a Monster,
Let her lye by him like a flattering ruine,
And at one instant kill both name and honour,
Let him be lost, no eye to weepe his end,
Nor finde no earth that's base enough to bury him,
Now sir fall on, I am ready to oppose ye.
I have better thought, I pray sir use your wife well.
Mine own humanity will teach me that sir,
And now you are all welcome, all, and wee'l to dinner,
This is my wedding day.
Ile crosse your joy yet.
I have seen a miracle, hold thine own souldier,
Sure they dare fight in fire that conquer women.
Has beaten all my loose thoughts out of mee,
As if he had thresh • um out o'th huske.
Save ye, which is the Lady of the house.
That's she sir, that pretty Lady,
If you would speak with her.
Don Michael Leon, another darer come?
Pray doe not know mee, I am full of businesse,
When I have more time ile be merry with ye,
It is the woman, good Madame tell me truly,
Had you a maid call'd Estifania ?
Yes truly had I.
Was she a maid doe you think?
I dare not sweare for her,
For she had but a scant fame.
Was she your kinse-woman?
Not that I ever knew, now I look better
I think you married her, give you much joy sir,
You may reclaime her 'twas a wild young girle.
Give me a halter, is not this house mine Madame •
Was not she owner of it, pray speak truly.
No, certainly, I am sure my mony paid for it,
And I nere remember yet I gave it you sir.
The hangings and the plate too?
All are mine sir,
And every thing you see about the building,
She only kept my house when I was absent,
And so ill kept it, I was weary of her.
What a Divell ailes hee?
Is possest ile assure you.
Where is your maide?
Doe not you know that have her?
She is yours now, why should I look after hir,
Since that first hower I came I never saw her.
I saw her later would the Divell had had her,
It is all true I finde, a wild-fire take her •
Is thy wife with child Don Michaell? thy excellent wife.
Art thou a man yet.
When shall we come and visit thee?
And eate some rare fruit, thou • ast admirable Or chards,
You are so jealous now, pox a your jealousy,
How scurvily you look.
Pre thee leave fooling,
I am in no humor now to foole and prattle,
Did she nere play the wagge with you.
Yes many times, so often that I was asham'd to keep her,
But I forgave her sir, in hope she would mend still,
And had not you o'th instant married her,
I had put her off.
I thank ye I am blest still,
Which way so ere I turne I am a made man,
Miserably gull'd beyond recovery.
Youl stay and dine.
Certaine I cannot Captaine,
Hark in thine eare, I am the ar • ant'st puppy,
The miserablest Asse, but I must leave ye,
I am in hast, in hast, blesse ye good madame,
And you prove as good as my wife. Exit.
Will you come neer sir, will your grace but honour me,
And tast our dinner, you are nobly welcome,
All angers past I hope, and I shall serve yee.
Thou art the stock of men, and I admire thee. Exeu ̄ t.
Ile goe to a conjurer but ile find this pol-cat,
This pilfring whore, a plague of vayles I cry,
And covers for the impudence of women,
Their sanctity in show will deceive Divells,
It is my evill Angell let me blesse mee.
Tis he, I am caught, I must stand to it stoutly,
And show no shake of feare, I see he is angry,
Vext at the uttermost.
My worthy wife,
I have been looking of your modesty,
All the towne over.
My most noble husband,
I am glad I have found ye, for in truth I am weary,
Weary and lame with looking out your Lordship.
I have been in bawdy howses.
I beleeve ye, and very lately too.
Pray ye pardon mee,
To seek your Ladiship, I have been in cell • rs,
In private cellers, where the thirsty bawds
Heare your confessions; I have been at plaies,
To look you out amongst the youthfull actors,
At Puppet shewes, you are Mistris of the motions;
At gosshippings I hearkned after ye,
But amongst those confusions of lewd tongues
There's no distinguishing beyond a Babell.
I was amongst the Nuns because you sing well,
But they say yours are bawdy songs, they mourn for ye,
And last I went to Church to seek you out,
Tis so loug since you were there, they have forgot ye.
You have had a pretty progresse, ile tell mine now
To look you out, I went to twenty Taverns.
And are you sober?
Yes, I reele not yet sir,
Where I saw twenty drunk most of em souldiers,
There I had great hope to finde you disguisd too.
From hence to'th dicing house, there I found
Quarrels needlesse, and senselesse, swords, and pots, and can dlesticks,
Tables, and stooles, and all in one confusion,
And no man knew his friend, I left this Chaos,
And to the Chyrurgions went, he wi • ld me stay,
For saies he learnedly, if he be tipled,
Twenty to one he whores, and then I beare of him.
If he be mad, he quarrels, then he comes • oo,
I sought ye where no safe thing would have ventred
Amongst diseases, base, and vild, vild women,
For I remembred your old Roman axiom,
The more the danger, still the more the honour.
Last to your Confessor I came, who told me
Yo • were too proud to pray, and here I have found ye.
She beares up bravely and the rogue is witty,
But I shall dash it instantly to nothing,
Here leave we off our wanton languages,
And now conclude we in a sharper tongue.
Why am I cozend,
Why am I abused.
Thou most vild, base, abominable.
Captaine.
Thou stinking overstewd, poore, po • ky •
Captaine.
Doe you Eccho me?
Yes Sir, and goe before ye,
And round about ye, why doe you rayle at me
For that, that was your own sin, your own knavery.
And brave me too.
You had best now draw your sword Captaine,
Draw it upon a woman, doe brave Captaine,
Vpon your wife, oh most renowned Captaine.
A plague upon thee, answer me directly,
Why didst thou marry me?
To be my husband;
I had thought you had had infinite, but i'm cozend.
Why didst thou flatter me, and shew me wonders,
A house, and riches, when they are but shadowes,
Shadowes to me.
Why did you work on me,
It was but my part to requite you Sir,
With your strong souldiers wit, and swore you would bring me
So much in chaines, so much in jewels husband,
So much in right rich cloathes.
Thou hast um rascall •
I gave um to thy hands, my trunks and all;
And thou hast opend um, and sold my treasure.
Sir, Theres your treasure, sell it to a tinker
To mend old kettles, is this noble usage,
Let all the world view here the Captaines treasure,
A man would think now these were worthy matters:
Here's a shooing-horne chaine, gilt over, how it senteth
Worse then the mouldy durty heel it served for,
And heres another of a lesser value,
So litle, I would shame to tye my dog in't,
These are my joynter, blush and save a labour,
Or these else will blush for ye.
A fire subtle ye, are ye so crafty.
Heres a goodly jewell,
Did not you win this at Goletta Captaine,
Or took it in the field from some brave Bashaw,
How it sparkles like an old Ladies eyes,
And fills each roome with light like a close lanthorne,
This would doe rarely in an Abby window,
To cosen Pilgrims.
Preethee leave prating.
And here's a chaine of whitings eyes for pearles,
A mussell-monger would have made a better.
Nay, preethee wife, my cloathes, my cloathes.
Ile tell yee,
Your cloathes are paralells to these, all counter • et.
Put these and them on, you are a man of copper,
A kinde of candlestick, these you thought my husband,
To have cozend me withall, but I am quit with you.
Is there no house then, nor no grounds about it?
No plate nor hangings?
There are none sweet husband,
Shadow for shadow is an equall justice,
Can you raile now, pray put your fury up sir,
And speak great words, you are a souldier, thunder.
I will speak litle, I have plaid the foole,
And so I am rewarded.
You have spoke well sir,
And now I see you are so conformable,
Ile heighthen you againe, goe to your house,
They are packing to be gone, you must sup there,
Ile meet ye, and bring clothes, and cleane shirts after,
And all things shall be well; ile colt ye once more,
And teach ye to bring copper.
Tell me one thing,
I doe beseech thee tell me, tell me truth wife,
However I forgive thee, art thou honest,
The Beldam swore.
I bid her tell you so sir,
It was my plot, alas my credulous husband,
The Lady told you too.
Most strange things of thee.
Still twas my way, and all to try your sufferance,
And she denied the house.
She knew me not;
No, nor no title that I had.
Twas well carried;
No more, I am right and straight.
I would beleeve thee,
But heaven knowes how my heart is, will ye follow me.
Ile be there straight.
I am fooled, yet dare not finde it. Exit Perez.
Goe silly foole, thou maist be a good souldier
In open fleld, but for our private service
Thou art an asse, ile make thee so or misse else. Ent. Cac.
Here comes another Trout that I must tickle,
And tickle daintily, I have lost my end else.
May I crave your leave sir?
Preethee be answered, thou shalt crave no leave,
I am in my meditations, doe not vex me,
A beaten thing, but this houre a most brused thing,
That people had compassion on, it looked so.
The next Sir Palmerin, heres fine proportion,
An Asse, and then an Elephant, sweet justice,
Theres no way left to come at her now, no craving,
If mony could come neere, yet I would pay him;
I have a mind to make him a huge cuckold,
And mony may doe much, a thousand duckets,
Tis but the letting blood of a ranck heire.
Pray ye heare me.
I know thou h • st some wedding ring to pawn now.
Of Silver and guilt with a blind posy in't,
Love and a mill-horse should goe round togither,
Or thy childs whistle, or thy squirills chaine,
Ile none of um, I would she did but know me,
Or would this fellow had but use of mony,
That I might come in any way.
I am gone sir,
And I shall tell the beauty sent me to ye,
The Lady Margarita.
Stay I prethee,
What is thy will, I turne me wholly to ye,
And talk now till thy tongue ake, I will heare yee.
She would entreat ye sir.
She shall command sir,
Let it be so I beseech thee my sweet gentlewoman,
Doe not forget thy selfe.
She does command then,
This curtesy, because she knowes you are noble.
Your Mistris by the way.
My naturall Mistris,
Vpon these Iewels sir, they are faire and rich •
And view um right.
To doubt um is an heresy.
A thousand duckets, 'tis upon necessity
Of present use, her husband sir is stubborne.
Long may he be so.
She desires withall, a better knowledge of your parts and person,
And when you please to doe her so much honour.
Comelet's dispatch.
In troath I have heard hir say sir,
Of a fat man she has not seen a sweeter,
But in this businesse sir.
Let's doe it first •
And then dispute, the Ladies use may long • or't.
All secrecy she would desire, she told me
How wise you are.
We are not wise to talke thus,
Carry her the gold, ile look her out a jewell,
Shall sparkle like her eyes, and thee another,
Come pre thee come, I long to serve thy lady,
Long monstrously, now valor I shall meet ye,
You that dare Dukes.
Green goose you are now in sippets. Exeunt.
He shall not have his will, I shall prevent him,
I have a toy here that will t • rne the tide,
And sodainly, and strangely, heere Don Iuan,
Doe you present it to him.
I am commanded. Exit.
A fellow sounded out of Charity,
And moulded to the height contemne his maker,
Curbe the freehand that fram'd him? This must not be.
That such an oyster shell should hold a pearle,
And of so rare a price in prison,
Was she made to be the matter of her own undoing,
To let a slove • ly unweildy fellow,
Vn • uly and selfe will'd, dispose her beauties,
We suffer all sir in this sad Eclipse,
She should shine where she might show like her selfe,
An absolute sweetnesse, to comfort those admire her,
And shed her beames upon her friends.
We are gulld all,
And all the world will grumble at your patience,
If she be ravish't thus.
Ne • e feare it Sanchio,
Weel have her free againe, and move at Court,
In her cleere orbe, but one sweet hansomenesse,
To blesse this part of Spaine, and have that slubberd.
Tis every good mans cause, and we must stir in it.
Ile warrant he shall be glad to please us,
And glad to share too, we shall heare anon
A new song from him, let's attend a litle. Exeunt •
Coronell, I am bound to you for this noblenesse,
I should have been your officer, tis true sir,
And a proud man I should have been to have serv'd you •
'Tas pleas'd the King out of his boundlesse favours,
To make me your companion, this commission
Gives me a troope of horse.
I rejoyce at it,
And am a glad man we shall gain your company,
I am sure the King knows you are newly married,
And out of that respect gives you more time sir.
Within foure daies I am gone, so he commands me,
And tis not mannerly for me to argue it,
The time growes shorter still, are your goods ready.
They are aboard.
Who waits there?
Sir.
Doe you heare ho, goe carry this unto your Mistris sir,
And lether see how much the King has honour'd mee,
Bid hir be lusty, she must make a souldier. Exit.
Sir,
Goe take downe all the hangings,
And pack up all my cloths, my plate and Iewels,
And all the furniture that's portable,
Sir when we lye in garrison, 'tis necessary
We keep a handsome port, for the kings honour;
And doe you heare, let all your Ladies wardrobe
Be safely plac'd in trunks, they must along too.
Whether must they goe sir.
To the warres Lorenzo,
And you and all, I will not leave a turne-spit,
That has one dram of spleene against a Dutchman.
Why then S t Iaques hey, you have made us all sit,
And if we leave ye, does my Lady goe too.
The stuffe must goe to morrow towards the sea sir,
All all must goe.
Why Pedro, vasco, Dego.
Come help me, come come boyes, soldadoes, comrades,
Wee'l fley these beere-bellied rogues, come away quickly.
Has taken a brave way to save his honour,
And crosse the Duke, now I shall love him dearely,
By the life of credit thou art a noble gentleman.
Why how now wife, what sick at my preferment,
This is not kindly done.
No sooner love ye,
Love ye intirely sir, brought to consider
The goodnesse of your mind and mine owne duty,
But loose you instantly, be divorc'd from ye,
This is a cruelty, ile to the King
And tell him 'tis unjust to part two soules,
Too minds so neerely mixt.
By no means sweet heart.
• f he were married but foure daies as I am.
He would hang himselfe the fift, or fly his Country.
He would make it treason for that tongue that durst
But talke of warre, or any thing to vexe him,
You shalt not goe.
Indeed I must sweet wife,
What shall I loose the King for a few kisses,
Wee'l have enough.
Ile to the Duke my cozen, he shall to th'King.
He did me this great office,
I thank his grace for't, should I pray him now,
To undoe't againe, fye 'twere a ba • e discredit.
Would I were able sir to bear you company,
How willing should I be then, and how merry,
I will not live alone.
Be in peace you shall not. knock within.
What k • ockings this, oh heave ̄ my head, why rascals
I think the war's begun i'th house already.
The preparation is, they are taking downe,
And packing up the hangings, plate and Iewels,
And all those furnitures that shall befit me
When I lye in garrison.
Must the Coach goe too Sir?
How will your Lady passe to'th sea else easily?
We shall finde shipping fort there to transport it.
I goe alas.
Ile have a maine care of ye,
I know ye are sickly, he shall drive the easier,
And all accommodation shall attend ye.
Woudl I were able,
Come I warrant ye,
Am not I with ye sweet, are her cloaths packt up,
And all her linnens? give your maids direction,
You know my times but short, and I am commanded.
Let me have a nurse,
And all such necessary people with me,
And an easie bark.
It shall not trot I warrant ye,
Curve at it may sometimes.
I am with child sir.
At foure daies warning, this is something speedy,
Doe you conceave as our jennets doe with a west winde,
My heire will be an arrant fleet one Lady,
Ile sweare you were a maid when I first lay with ye.
Pray doe not sweare, I thought I was a maid too,
But we may both be cozend in that point Sir.
In such a strait point sure I could not erre Madam.
This is another tendernesse to try him,
Fetch hir up now.
You must provide a cradle, and what a troubles that •
The sea shall rock it,
• Tis the best nurse; twill roare and rock together,
A swinging storme will sing you such a lullaby.
Faith let me stay, I shall but shame ye Sir.
And you were a thousand shames you shall along with me,
At home I am sure you'le prove a million,
Every man carries the bundle of his sinnes,
Vpon his own back, you are mine, Ile sweat for ye.
What Sir, preparing for your noble journey?
Tis well and full of care.
J saw your minde was wedded to the warre,
And knew you would prove some good man for your cou ̄ try •
Therefore faire Cozen with your gentle pardon,
I got this place, what mourne at his advancement?
You are too blame, he will come agen sweet cozen,
Meane time like sad Penelope and sage,
Amongst your maids at home, and huswifely.
No sir, I dare not leave her to that solitarinesse,
She is young, and griefe or ill newes from those quarters
May dayly crosse her, she shall goe along Sir.
By no meanes Captaine.
By all meanes an't please ye?
What take a young and tender bodied Lady,
And expose her to those dangers, and those tumults,
A sickly Lady too.
Twill make hir well Sir,
Theres no such friend to health as wholsome travell.
Away it must not be.
It ought not Sir,
Goe hurry her, it is not humane Captaine.
I cannot blame her teares, fright her with tempests
With thunder of the warre.
I dare sweare if she were able.
Shee is most able.
And pray ye sweare not, she must goe theres no remedy,
Nor greatnesse, nor the trick you had to partus,
Which I smell too ranck, too open, too evident
(And I must tell you Sir, tis most unnoble)
Shall hinder me: had she but ten houres life,
Nay lesse, but two houres, I would have her with me,
I would not leave her fame to so much ruine,
To such a desolation and discredit
As her weaknesse and your hot will wood worke her too.
What Masque is this now?
More tropes and figures, to abuse my sufferance,
What cozen's this?
Michael van owle, how dost thou?
In what dark barne or tod of aged • vy
Hast thou lyen hid?
Things must both ebbe and flow Coronell,
And people must conceale, and shine agen.
You are welcome hither as your friend may say Gentlema ̄ ,
A pretty house yee see hansomely seated,
Sweet and convenient walkes, the waters cristall.
He's certaine mad.
As mad as a French Tayler,
That has nothing in's head but ends of fustians.
I see you are packing now my gentle cozen,
And my wife told me I should finde it so,
Tis true I doe, you were merry when I was last here,
But twas your will to try my patience Madam.
I am sorry that my swift occasions
Can let you take your pleasure here no longer,
Yet I would have you think my honourd cozen,
This house and all I have are all your servants.
What house, what pleasure sir, what doe you mean?
You hold the jest so stiffe, twill prove discurtious,
This house I meane, the pleasures of this place.
And what of them?
They are mine Sir, and you know it,
My wives I meane, and so conferd upon me,
The hangings sir I must entreat, your servants,
That are so busie in their offices,
Againe to minister to their right uses,
I shall take view oth plate anon, and furniture •
That are of under place, you are merry still cozen,
And of a pleasant constitution,
Men of great fortunes make their mirths ad placitum.
Preethee good stubborne wife, tell me directly,
Good evill wife leave fooling and tell me honestly,
Is this my kinsman?
I can tell yee nothing.
I have many kinsmen, but so mad a one,
And so phantastick, all the house.
All mine,
And all within it, I will not bate ye an ace ont,
Can you not receave a noble curtesie,
And quietly and handsomely as ye ought Couze,
But you must ride oth top ont.
Canst thou fight?
Ile tell ye presently, I cood have done sir.
For ye must law and claw before ye get it.
Away, no quarrels.
Now I am more temperate,
Ile have it proved if you were never yet in Bedlam,
Never in love for thats a lunacy,
No great state left ye that you never lookt for,
Nor cannot mannage, thats a ranke distemper
That you were christend, and who answer'd for ye,
And then I yeeld.
Has halfe perswaded me I was bred ith' moone,
I have nere a bush at my breech, are not we both mad,
And is not this a phantastick house we are in,
And all a dreame we doe, will ye walk out sir,
And if I doe not beat thee presently
Into a sound beliefe, as sense can give thee,
Brick me into that wall there for a chimney peece,
And say I was one oth Caesars, done by a seale-cutter.
Ile talke no more, come weele away immediatly.
Why then the house is his, and all thats in it,
Ile give away my skin but Ile undoe yee,
I gave it to his wife, you must restore Sir,
And make a new provision.
Am I mad now or am I christend, you my pagan co zen
My mighty Mahound kinsman, what quirk now;
You shall be welcome all, I hope to see sir
Your Grace here, and my coze, we are all souldiers,
And must doe naturally for one another.
Are ye blank at this, then I must tell ye Sir,
Ye have no command, now ye may goe at pleasure
And ride your asse troope, twas a trick I use
To try your jealousie upon entreatie,
And saving of your wife.
All this not moues me,
Nor stirs my gall, nor alters my affections,
You have more furniture, more houses Lady,
And rich ones too, I will make bold with those,
And you have Land ith Indies as I take it,
Thither weele goe, and view a while those clymats,
Visit your Factors there, that may betray ye,
Tis done, we must goe.
Now thou art a brave Gentleman,
And by this sacred light I love thee dearely,
The house is none of yours, I did but jest Sir,
Nor you are no coze of mine, I beseech yee vanish,
I tell you plaine, you have no more right then he
Has, that senselesse thing, your wife has once more foold ye:
Goe ye and consider.
Good morrow my sweet cozen, I should be glad sir.
By this hand she dies for't,
Or any man that speakes for her. Exit Per.
These are fine toyes.
Let me request you stay but one poore month,
You shall have a Commission and ile goe too,
Give me but will so far.
Well I will try ye,
Good morrow to your Grace, we have private businesse.
If I misse thee agen, I am an arrant bungler.
Thou shalt have my command, and ile march under thee,
Nay be thy boy before thou shalt be bafled,
Thou art so brave a fellow.
I have seen visions. Exeunt.
Come hether wife, doe you know this hand?
I doe Sir.
Tis Estifanias, that was once my woman.
She writes to me here, that one Cacafogo
A usuring jewellers son (I know the rascall)
Is mortally fallne in love with ye.
Is a monster, deliver me from mountaines.
Doe you goe a birding for all sorts of people,
And this evening will come to ye and shew ye jewels,
And offers any thing to get accesse to ye,
• f I can make or sport or profit on him •
(For he is fit for both) she bids me use him,
And so I will, be you conformable, and follow but my will.
I shall not faile sir
Will the Duke come againe doe you think.
No sure Sir,
Has now no pollicie to bring him hither •
Nor b • ing you to him, if my wit hold faire wife:
Lets in to dinner. Exeunt.
Had I but lungs enough to bawle sufficiently,
That all the queanes in Christendome might heare me,
That men might run away from contagion,
I had my wish; would it were most high treason,
Most infinite high, for any man to marry,
I meane for any man that would live hansomely,
And like a Gentleman, in his wits and credit,
What torments shall I put her to, Phalaris bull now,
Pox they love bulling too well, though they smoak for't,
Cut her apeeces, every peece will live still,
And every morsell of her will doe mischiefe;
They have so many lives, there's no hanging of um
They are too light to drowne, they are cork and feathers,
To burne too cold, they live like Salamanders;
Vnder huge heaps of stones to bury her,
And so depresse her as they did the Giants;
She will move under more then built old Babell,
• must destroy her.
Be cozend by a thing of clouts, a she moth,
That every silkmans shop breeds; to be cheated,
And of a thousand duckets by a whim wham.
Who's that is cheated, speak againe thou vision,
But art thou cheated? minister some comfort,
Tell me directly art thou cheated bravely,
Come, preethee come, art thou so pure a coxcomb
To be und one, doe not dissemble with me,
Tell me I conjure thee.
Then keep thy circle,
For I am a spirit wild that flies about thee,
And who ere thou art, if thou be'st humane •
Ile let thee plainly know, I am cheated damnably.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou laugh damnably, I say most damnably.
By whom, good spirit speak, speak ha, ha, ha.
I will utter, laugh till thy lungs crack, by a rascall woman,
A lewd, abominable, and plain woman?
Dost thou laugh still.
I must laugh, preethee pardon me,
I shall laugh terribly.
I shall be angry, terrible angry, I have cause.
Thats it, and tis no reason but thou sho • ldst be angry,
Angry at heart, yet I must laugh still at thee,
By a woman cheated, art' sure it was a woman?
I shall break thy head, my vallour itches at thee.
It is no matter, by a woman cozend,
A reall woman.
A reall divell,
Plague of her jewels and her copper chaines •
How rank they smell.
Sweet cozend sir let me see them,
I have been cheated too, I would have you note that
And lewdly cheated, by a woman also,
A scurvie woman, I am undone sweet Sir,
Therefore I must have leave to laugh.
Pray ye take it,
You are the merriest undone man in Europe.
What need we fiddles, bawdy songs and sack,
When our own miseries can make us merry.
Ha, ha, ha.
I have seene these jewels, what a notable penniworth
Have you had next your heart, you will not take Sir
Some twenty Duckets.
Thou art deceiv'd I will take.
To cleere your bargaine now.
Ile take some ten, some any thing, some halfe ten,
Halfe a Ducket.
An excellent lapidary set these stones sure,
Doe you mark their waters?
Quick-sand choak their waters,
And hirs that bought um too, but I shall finde hir.
And so shall I, I hope, but doe not hurt her,
You cannot finde in all this kingdome,
If you had need of cozening, as you may have,
For such grosse natures will desire it often,
Tis at some time too a fine variety,
A woman that can cozen ye so neatly,
She has taken halfe mine anger off with this trick. Exit.
If I were valiant now, I would kill this fellow,
I have mony enough lies by me at a pinch
To pay for twenty rascalls lives that vex me,
Ile to this Lady, there I shall be satisfied. Exit.
Come, weele away unto your country house •
And there weele learne to live contently,
This place is full of charge, a • d full of hurrey,
No part of sweetnesse dwels about these citties.
Whether you will, I wait upon your pleasure;
Live in a hollow tree Sir, Ile live with ye.
I, now you strike a harmony a true one,
When your obedience waits upon your husband,
And your sick will aimes at the care of honour,
Why now I dote upon ye, love ye dearely,
And my rough nature falls like roaring streames,
Cleerely and sweetly into your embraces,
O what a jewell is a woman excellent,
A wise a vertuous and a noble woman,
When wee meet such, we bear our stamps on both sides,
And through the world we hold our currant virtues,
Alone we are single meadalls, only faces,
And weare our fortunes out in uselesse shadowes,
Command you now, and ease me of that trouble,
Ile be as humble to you as a servant,
Bid whom you please, invite your noble friends,
They shall be welcome all, visit acquaintance,
Goe at your pleasure, now experience
Has link't you fast unto the chain of goodnesse: Clashing swords. A cry within, downe with their swords.
What noise is this, what dismall cry.
Tis lowd too.
Sure ther's some mischiefe done i'th street look out there.
Look out and help.
Oh sir the Duke Medina.
What of the Duke Medina.
Oh sweet gentleman, is all most slain.
A way a way & help him, all the house help. Exit
How slain? why Margarita, Servant.
Why wife, sure some new device they have a foot againe,
Some trick upon my credit, I shall meet it,
I had rather guide a ship Imperiall
Alone, and in a storme, then rule one woman.
How came ye hurt sir?
I fell out with my friend the noble Coronell, •
My cause was naught, for 'twas about your honour:
And he that wrongs the Innocent nere prospers;
And he has left me thus for charity,
Lend me a bed to ease my tortur'd body,
That ere I perish I may show my penitence,
I feare I am slaine.
Help gentlemen to carry him,
There shall be nothing in this house my Lord,
But as your owne.
I thank ye noble sir.
To bed with him, and wife give your attendance.
Doctors and surgions.
Doe not disquiet me,
But let me take my leave in peace. Exit Duke. Sanch. Alon. Marg. Servants.
Afore me,
Tis rarely counterfeited.
True, it is so sir,
And take you heed, this last blow doe not spoile ye,
He is not hurt, only we made a scuffle,
As though we purpos'd anger, that same scratch
On's hand he took, to colour all and draw compassion,
That he might get into your house more cunningly,
I must not stay, stand now, and y'are a brave fellow.
• thank ye noble Coronell, and I honour ye, Exit Iuan.
Never be quiet.
He's most desperate ill sir,
I doe not think these ten months will recover him.
Does he hire my house to play the foole in,
Or does it stand on Fairy ground we are haunted,
Are all men and their wives troubled with dreams thus.
What aile you sir?
Nay what aile you sweet wife •
To put these daily pastimes on my patience,
What dost thou see in mee, that I should suffer thus,
Have not I done my part like a true husband,
And paid some desperate debts you never look'd for.
You have done hand • omely I must confesse sir.
Have I not kept thee waking like a hawke?
And watcht thee with delights to satisfy thee?
The very tithes of which had wonne a widow.
Alas I pitty ye.
Thou wilt make me angry,
Thou never saw'st me mad yet.
You are alwaies,
You carry a kind of bedlam still about ye.
If thou persuest me farther I run stark mad,
If you have more hurt Dukes or Gentlemen,
To lye here on your cure, I shall be desperate,
I know the trick, and you shall feel I know it,
Are ye so hot that no hedge can containe ye,
Ile have thee let blood in all the veines about thee,
Ile have thy thoughts found too, and have them open'd,
Thy spirits purg'd, for those are they that fire ye,
Thy maid shall be thy Mistris thou the maid,
And all those servile labours that she reach at,
And goe through cherefully, or else sleep empty,
That maid shall lye by me to teach you duty,
You in a pallat by to humble ye,
And greeve for what you loose.
I have lost my selfe sir,
And all that was my base selfe, disobedience, kneeles
My wantonnesse my stubbornenesse • have lost too,
And now by that pure faith good wives are crown'd with,
By your own noblenesse.
I take ye up • and weare ye next my heart,
See you be worth it. Now what with you?
I come to tell my Lady,
There is a fulsome fellow would fain speak with her.
Tis Cacafogo goe and entertaine him,
And draw him on with hopes.
I shall observe ye.
I have a rare designe upon that gentleman,
And you must work too.
I shall sir most willingly.
A way then both, & keep him close in some pl • ce
From the Dukes sight, and keep the Duke in too,
Make um beleeve both, Ile find time to cure um. Exeunt.
Why how darst thou meet me againe thou rebell,
And knowst how thou hast used mee thrice, thou rascall,
Were there not waies enough to fly my vengeance,
No holes nor vaults to hide thee from my fury,
But thou must meet me face to face to kill thee?
I would not seek thee to destroy thee willingly,
But now thou comest to invite me,
And comest upon mee,
How like a sheep biting Rogue taken i'th manner,
And ready for the halter dost thou look now,
Thou hast a hanging look thou scurvy thing, hast nere a knife
Nor never a string to lead thee to Elisium?
Be there no pittifull Pothecaries in this towne,
That have compassion upon wretched women,
And dare administer a dramme of rats-bane,
But thou must fall to mee?
I know you have mercy.
If I had tunnes of mercy thou deserv'st none,
What new tricks is now a foot, and what new houses
Have you i'th aire, what orchards in apparition,
What canst thou say for thy life?
Litle or nothing,
I know you'l kill me, and I know tis uselesse
To beg for mercy, pray let me draw my book out,
And pray a litle.
Doe a very litle,
For I have farther businesse then thy killing,
I have mony yet to borrow, speak when you are ready.
Now now sir now, shewes a Pistoll.
Come on, doe you start off from me,
Doe you swear great Captaine, have you seen a spirit.
Doe you weare gunnes.
I am a souldiers wife sir,
And by that priviledge I may be arm'd,
Now whats the newes, and let's discourse more friendly,
And talk of our affaires in peace.
Let me see,
Pre thee let me fee thy gun, 'tis a very pretty one.
No no sir you shall feele.
Hold ye villaine, what thine own husband?
Let mine own • usband then,
Be in's own wits, there, there's a thousand duckets,
Who must provide for you, and yet you'l kill me.
I will not hurt thee for ten thousand millions.
When will you redeem your Iewels, I have pawn'd um,
You see for what, we must keep tooch.
Ile kisse thee,
And get as many more, ile make thee famous,
Had we the house now.
Come along with mee,
If that be vanish't there be more to hyre sir.
I see I am an asse when thou art neere me.
Is the foole come.
Yes and i'th celler fast,
And there he staies his good houre till I call him,
He will make dainty musick among the sack-butts,
I have put him just sir, under the Dukes chamber.
It is the better.
Has given me roially,
And to my Lady a whole load of portigues.
Better and better still, goe Margarita,
Now play your prize, you say you dare be honest,
Ile put ye to your best.
Secure your selfe sir, give me the candle,
Passe away in silence. Exit Leon and Altea.
Who's there, oh oh.
My Lord.
Have ye brought me comfort.
I have my Lord, Enter Duke in a gowne.
Come forth 'tis I, come gently out Ile help ye,
Come softly too, how doe you.
Are there none here,
Let mee look round; we cannot be too wary, noise below.
Oh let me blesse this houre, are you alone sweet friend.
Alone to comfort you. Cacafogo makes a noise below.
What's that you tumble,
I have heard a noise this halfe houre under mee,
A fearfull noise.
The fat thing's mad i'th celler,
And stumbles from one hogs head to another,
Two cups more, and he nere shall find the way out,
What doe you feare, come, sit downe by mee cheare • ully,
My husband's safe, how doe your wounds.
I have none Lady,
My wounds I counterfeited cunningly, Noise below.
And fained the quarrell too, to injoy you sweet,
Let's loose no time, heark the same noise againe.
What noise, why look ye pale, I heare no stirring,
This goblin in the vault will be so tipled,
You are not well I know by your flying fancy,
Your body's ill at ease, your wounds.
I have none, I am as lusty and as full of health,
High in my blood.
Weak in your blood you would say,
How wretched is my case willing to please ye,
And find you so disable.
Beleeve me Lady.
I know you will venter all you have to satisfy me,
Your life I know, but is it fit • • poile yee,
Is it my love doe you think.
Here's to the Duke •
It named me certainly,
I heard it plainly sound.
You are hurt mortally,
And fitter for your prayers sir then pleasure,
What starts you make, I would not kisse you wantonly,
For the worlds wealth • have I securd my Husband,
And put all doubts aside to be deluded.
I come I come.
Heaven blesse mee.
And blesse us both, for sure this is the Divell •
I plainly heard it now, he will come to fetch ye,
A very spirit, for he spoke under ground,
And spoke to y • u just as you would have snatcht me,
You are a wicked man, and sure this haunts ye,
Would you were out o'th house.
I would I were,
A that condition I had leapt a window.
And that's the least leap if you mean to scape sir,
Why what a frantick man were you to come here,
What a weak man to counterfeit deep wounds,
To wound another deeper.
Are you honest then.
Yes then and now, and ever, & excellent honest,
And exercise this pastime but to shew ye,
Great men are fooles sometimes as well as wretches,
Would you were well hurt with any hope of life,
Cut to the braines, or run clean through the body,
To get out quietly as you got in sir,
I wish it like a friend that loves ye dearely,
For if my husband take ye, and take ye thus a counterfeit,
One that would clip his credit out of his honour,
He must kill ye presently,
There is no mercy nor an hower of pitty,
And for me to intreat in such an agony,
Would shew me litle better then one guilty,
Have you any mind to a Lady now.
Would I were off faire,
If ever Lady caught me in a trap more.
If you be well and lusty, fy fy shake not •
You say you love me, come, come bravely now,
Dispise all danger, I am ready for ye.
She mocks my misery, thou cruell Lady.
Thou cruell Lord, wouldst thou betray my honesty,
Betray it in mine own house, wrong my husband,
Like a night theefe, thou darst not name by day-light.
I am most miserable.
You are indeed,
And like a foolish thing you have made your selfe so,
Could not your own discretion tell ye sir,
When I was married I was none of yours,
Your eyes were then commanded to look off me,
And I now stand in a circle and secure,
Your spells nor power can never reach my body,
Mark me but this, and then sir be most miserable,
Tis sacriledge to violate a wedlock,
You rob too Templers, make your selfe twice guilty,
You ruine hirs, and spot hir noble husbands.
Let me be gone, Ile never more a tempt ye.
You cannot goe, 'tis not in me to save ye,
Dare ye doe ill, and poorely then shrinke under it?
Were I the Duke Medina, I would fight now,
For you must fight and bravely, it concernes you,
You doe me double wrong if you sneak off sir,
And all the world would say I lov'd a coward,
And you must dye too, for you will be killd,
And leave your youth, your honour and your state,
And all those deere delights you worship't heare. Noise below.
The noise againe.
Some small beere if you love me.
The Divell haunts you sure, your sinnes are mighty,
A drunken Divell too, to plague your villany.
Preserve me but this once.
There • s a deep well
In the next yard, if you dare venter drowning,
It is but death.
I would not dye so wretchedly.
Out of a garrat window Ile let you downe then,
But say the rope be rotten, 'tis huge high too.
have you no mercy.
Now you are frighted throughly,
And find what tis to play the foole in folly,
And see with cleere eyes your detested folly,
Ile be your guard.
And ile be your true servant,
Ever from this houre vertuously to love ye,
Chastly and modestly to look upon ye,
And here I seale it.
I may kisse a stranger, for you must now be so.
How doe you my Lord,
Me thinks you look but poorely on this matter.
Has my wife wounded ye, you were well before,
Pray sir be comforted, I have forgot all,
Truly forgiven too, wife you are a right one,
And now with unknowne nations I dare trust yee.
No more fain'd fights my Lord, they never prosper.
Who's this? the Divell in the vault?
Tis he sir, and as lovingly drunk, as though he had stu died it.
Give me a cup of Sack, and kisse me Lady,
Kisse my sweet face, and make thy husband cuckold,
An Ocean of sweet Sack, shall we speak treason?
He is divilish drunk.
I had thought he had beene a devill.
He made as many noyses and as horrible,
Oh a true lover sir will lament lowdly,
Which of the butts is your Mistris.
Butt in thy belly.
Theres two in thine I am sure, 'tis growne so mon strous,
Butt in thy face?
Goe carry him to sleepe,
A fooles love should be drunke he has paid well for't too.
When he is sober let him out to raile,
Or hang himselfe, there will be no losse of him.
Who's this? my Mauhound cozen?
Good Sir, tis very good, would I had a house too,
For there is no talking in the open ayre,
My Tarmogant Couze, I would be bold to tell ye,
I durst be merry too; I tell you plainly •
You have a pretty seat, you have the luck on't,
A pretty Lady too, I have mist both,
My Carpenter built in a myst I thank him,
Doe me the curtesie to let me see it,
See it but once more, But I shall cry for anger.
Ile hire a Chandlers shop close under ye,
And for my foolerie, sell sope and whip-cord,
Nay if you doe not laugh now & laugh heartily
You are a foole couze.
I must laugh a litle,
And now I have done couze thou shalt live with me
My merry couze, the world shall not divorce us,
Thou art a valiant man, and thou shalt never want •
Will this content thee?
Ile crye, and then ile be • hankfull,
Indeed I will, and ile be honest to ye.
I would live a swallow here I must confesse,
Wife I forgive thee all if thou be honest,
At thy perill, I beleeve thee excellent.
Jf I prove otherwaies, let me beg first,
Hold this is yours, some recompence for service,
Vse it to nobler ends then he that gave it.
And this is yours, your true commission, Sir,
Now you are a Captaine.
You are a noble Prince Sir,
And now a souldier, Gentleman, we all rejoyce in't.
Sir, I shall wait upon you through all fortunes •
And I.
And I must needs attend my Mistris.
Will you goe sister?
Yes indeed good brother,
I have too ties, mine own bloud,
And my Mistris.
Is she your sister?
Yes indeed good wife,
And my best sister,
For she prov'd so wench,
When she deceav'd you with a loving husband.
I would not deale so truly for a stranger.
Well I could chide yee,
But it must be lovingly and like a sister,
Ile bring you on your way, and feast yee nobly,
For now I have an honest heart to love yee,
And then deliver you to the blew Neptune.
Your colours you must weare, & weare em proud ly,
Weare em before the bullet, and in bloud too,
And all the world shall know
We are vertues servants.
And all the world shall know, a noble minde
Makes women beautifull and envie blinde. Exeunt.
GOod night our worthy friends, and may you part
Each with as merry and as free a hart
As you came hither; to those noble eyes
That daine to smile on our poore faculties,
And give a blessing to our labouring ends,
As we hope many, to such fortune sends
Their own desires, wiues faire as light as chast;
To those that live by spight
Wiues made in hast.