THE BROKEN HEART.
A Tragedy.
ACTED By the KINGS Majesties Seruants at the priuate House in the BLACK-FRIERS.
Fide Honor.
LONDON: Printed by I. B. for HVGH BEESTON, and are to be sold at his Shop, neere the Castle in Corne-hill. 1633.
T HE glory of a great name, acqui red by a greater glory of Action, hath in all ages liu'd the truest chronicle to his owne Memory. In the practise of which Argu ment, your grouth to perfection (even in youth) hath appear'd so sincere, so vn-flattering a Penne man ; that Posterity cannot with more delight read the merit of Noble endeauours, then noble endeavours merit thankes from Posterity to be read with de light. Many Nations, many eyes, have beene witnesses of your Deserts, and lou'd Them: Be pleas'd then, with the freedome of your own Nature, to admit ONE amongst All, particularly into the list of such as honour a faire Example of Nobilitie. There is a kinde of humble Ambition, not vn-commendable, when the silence of study breakes forth in to Discourse, coveting rather encouragement then Applause; yet herein Censo • re commonly is too severe an Auditor, with out the moderation of an able Patronage. I have ever beene slow in courtship of greatnesse, not ignorant of such defects as are frequent to Opinion : but the Iustice of your Inclinati on to Industry, emboldens my weaknesse, of confidence, to rellish an experience of your Mercy, as many brave Dan gers have tasted of your Courage. Your Lordship stroue to be knowne to the world (when the world knew you least) by voluntary but excellent Attempts: Like Allowance I plead of being knowne to your Lordship (in this low pre sumption) by tend • ing to a favourable entertaiment, a De uotion offred from a heart, that can be as truely sensible of a ny least respect, as ever professe the owner in my best, my • eadiest services, A Lover of your naturall Love to Vertue,
OVr Scene is Sparta. HE whose best of Art
Hath drawne this Peece, cals it the Broken Heart.
The Title lends no expectation here
Of apish laughter, or of some lame Ieere
At place or persons; no pretended clause
Of iest's fit for a brothell Courts' applause
From vulgar admiration: such low songs,
Tun'd to vnchast e • res, suit not modest tongues.
The Virgin • Sister then deseru'd fresh bayes
When Innocence and Sweetnesse crown'd their layes •
Then vices gasp'd for breath, whose whole Commerce
Was whip'd to Exile by vnblushing verse.
This law we keep • in our Presentment now,
Not to take freedome more then we allow;
What may be here thought a fiction, when Times youth
Wanted som • riper yeares, was knowne A Truth :
In which, if words haue cloath'd the subiect right,
You may pertake, a Pitty, with Delight.
D Ally not further, I will know the reason
That speeds thee to this iourney.
Reason? good Sir •
I can yeeld many.
Giue me one, a good one;
Such I expect, and e're we part must haue •
Ath •• s ? pray why to Athens ? you intend not
To kicke against the world, turne Cynicke, Stoicke,
Or read the Logicke Lecture, or become
An Ar •• pagite ; and Iudge in causes
Touching the Common wealth? for as I take it,
The budding of your chin cannot prognosticate
So grave an honour,
All this I acknowledge,
You doe: then ( 〈◊〉 ) if books and loue of knowledge
Enflame you to this trauell, here in Sparta
You may as freely study.
'Tis not that Sir.
Not, that Sir? As a father I command thee
To acquaint me with the truth •
Thus I obey •• :
After so many quarrels, as 〈◊〉
Fury, and R • ge had 〈◊〉 in blood, and 〈◊〉
Wit • 〈…〉
With now 〈…〉
Our present King 〈…〉
Your eager swords, and Seal'd a 〈◊〉 peace:
Friends you prosest your selues, which to conf •• me,
A resolution for a lasting league
Betw •• t your Families was entertain'd,
By ioyning in a 〈◊〉 bond,
Me, and the faire Penthea, onely daughter
To Thrasus.
What of this?
Much, much (deere sir)
A freedome of conuerse, an enterchange
Of holy, and chast loue, so sixt our soules
In a firme grouth of vnion, that no Time
Can eat 〈…〉 pledge: we had enioy'd
The sweets our vowes expected, had not cruelty
Preuented all those triumphs we prepar'd for,
By Thrasus his vntimely death.
Most certaine.
From this time splouted vp that poysonous stalke
Of Aco • it • , whose ripened fruit hath ravisht
All health, all comfort of a happy life:
For Ithocles her brother, proud of youth,
And prouder in his power, nourisht • losely
The memory of former discontents.
To glory in re • enge, by 〈◊〉 partly,
Partly by threat • , a woo • s at once, and forces
His virtuous sister to admit a marriage
With Basanes, a Noble-man, in honour
And riches, I confesse beyond my fortunes.
All this is no sound reason to import me
My leave for thy departure.
Now it followes,
〈◊〉 P • uthe • wedded to this torture
By an insulting brother, being secretly
Compeld to yeeld her virgine freedome vp
To him, who •• uer can vs • rp • her hear •
Before contracted mine, is now so 〈◊〉
To a most barbarous thr • ldome • misery,
Affliction, that he sauo •• not humanity •
Whos • sorrow melts not into more then pitty,
In hearing but her name.
As how pray?
Bassanes
The man that call • her wife; considers truly
What Heaven of perfections he is Lord o • ,
By thinking faire Penth •• his: This thought
Begets a kinde of Monster-Loue, which Loue
Is nurse vnto a feare so strong, and seruile,
As brands all dotage with a Iealousie.
All eyes who gaze upon that shrine of beauty,
He doth resolue, doe homage to the miracle;
Some one, he is assur'd, may now or then
(If opportunity but sort) preuaile:
So much out of a selfe-vnworthinesse
His feares transport him, not that he findes cause
In her obedience, but his owne distrust.
You spin out your discourse.
My griefs are violent •
For knowing how the Maid was heretofore
Courted by me, his iealousies grow wild
That I should steale againe into her fauours,
And vndermine her vertues: which the gods
Know I nor dare, nor dreame of: hence, from hence •
I vndertake a voluntary exile.
First, by my absence to take off the eares
Of Iealous Bassanes, but chiefly (Sir)
To free Penthea from a hell on earth:
Lastly, to lose the memory of something,
Her presence makes to liue in me afresh.
Enough (my Orgilus ) enough • To Athens
I giue a full consent: — Alas good Lady —
Wee shall heare from thee often?
Often.
See
Thy Sister comes to giue a farewell.
Brother.
〈1 line〉
A brothers kisse 〈…〉
Thy health, and thy well-doing, then my life.
Before we part, in presence of our father,
I must preferre a lu • t to ' 〈◊〉 .
You may stile it,
My brother, a command.
That you will promise
To passe neuer to any man, how euer worthy,
Your faith, till with our Fathers leave
I giue a free consent.
An easie motion,
I'le promise for her, Orgilus.
Your pardon;
Euphrania's oath must yeeld me satisfaction.
By Vesta's sacred fires I sweare.
And I
By great Apollo's be • mes ioyne in the vow;
Not without thy allowance, to bestow her
On any liuing.
Deere Euphrania
Mistake me not; farre, farre 'tis from my thought,
As farre from any wish of mine, to hinder
Preferment to an honourable bed,
Or fitting Fortune: thou art young, and handsome;
And 'twere iniustice; more, a tyrannie
Not to aduance thy merit. Trust me Sister,
It shall be my first care to see thee match'd
As may become thy choyce, and our contents:
I haue your oath.
You haue: but meane you brother
To lea • e us as you say?
I, I, Euphrania •
He has iust grounds direct him: I will proue
A father and a brother to thee.
Heauen
Does looke into the secrets of all hearts:
Gods you haue mercy with 'ee, else—
Doubt nothing
Thy brother will returne in safety to vs.
Soules sunke in sorrowes, never are without 'em;
They change fresh ayres, but beare their griefes about 'em.
The Spart • ne gods are graciou • , our humility
Shall bend before their Altars, and per •••••
Their Temples with abundant sacrifice.
• ee Lords, Amyclas your old King is entring
Into his youth againe. I shall shake on
This siluer badge of age, and change this snow
For haires as gay as are Apollo's lockes;
Our heart leaps in new vigour.
May old time
Run backe to double your long life (great Sir)
It will, it must Armostes, thy bold Nephew,
Death-brauing Ithocles, brings to our gates
Triumphs and peace vpon his conquering sword.
Laconia is a monarchy at length;
Hath in this latter warre trod vnderfoot
Messenes pride; Messene bowes her necke
To Lacedemons royalty: ô 'twas
A glorious victory, and doth deserue
More then a Chronicle; a Temple Lords,
A Temple, to the name of Ithocles.
Where didst thou leave him Prophilus ?
At Pephon
Most gracious Soueraigne; twenty of the noblest
Of the Messenians, there attend your pleasure
For such conditions as you shall propose.
In setling peace, and liberty of life.
When comes your friend and General?
He promis'd
To follow with all speed conuenient.
Our daughter — Deere Calantha, the happy newes,
The conquest of Messene, hath already
Enrich'd thy knowledge.
With the circumstance
And manner of the fight, related faithfully
By Prophilus himselfe; but pray Sir, tell me,
How doth the youthfull Generall demeane
His actions in these fortunes?
Excellent Princesse,
Your owne faire eyes may soone report a truth
Vnto your judgement, with what moderation,
Calmenesse of nature, measure, bounds and limits
• f thankefulne ••• and ioy, 'a doth digest
Such amplitude of his successe, as would
In others, moulded of a spirit lesse cleare,
Aduance 'em to comparison with heaven.
But Ithocles. —
Your friend.—
He is so Madam,
In which the period of my Fate consists:
He in this Firmament of honour, stands
Like a Starre fixt, not mov'd with any thunder
Of popular applause, or sudden lightning
Of selfe-opinion: He hath seru'd his Country,
And thinks 'twas but his duty.
You describe
A miracle of man.
Such Crotolon,
On forfeit of a Kings word thou wilt finde him:
Harke, warning of his comming, all attend him.
Returne into these armes, thy home, thy sanctuary.
Delight of Sparta, treasure of my bosome,
Mine owne, owne Ithocles.
Your humblest subiect.
Proud of the blood I claime an Interest in;
As brother to thy mother, I embrace thee
Right noble Nephew.
Sir, your love's too partiall.
Our Country speakes by me, who by thy valour,
Wisdome and seruice, shares in this great action;
Returning thee, in part of thy due merits,
A generall welcom.
You exceed in bounty.
Chrystalla, Philena, the Chaplet. — Ithocles
Vpon the wings of Fame, the singular
And chosen fortune of an high attempt,
Is borne so past the view of common sight,
That I my selfe, with mine owne hands, haue wrought
To crowne thy Temples, this provinciall garland;
Accept, weare, and enioy it, as our gift
Deseru'd, not purchas'd.
Y'are a royall mayd.
Shee is in all our daughter.
Let me blush,
Acknowledging how poorely I haue seru'd,
What nothings I haue done, compar'd with th' honours
Heap'd on the issue of a willing minde;
In that lay mine ability, that onely
For who is he so sluggish from his birth?
So little worthy of a name, or country,
That owes not out of gratitude for life,
A debt of Seruice, in what kinde soeuer
Safety or Counsaile of the Common-wealth
Requires for paiment?
A speaks truth.
Whom hea • en
Is pleas'd to stile victorious, there, to such,
Applause runs madding, like the drunken priests
In Bacchus sacrifices without Reason;
Voycing the Leader on a Demi god:
When as indeed, each common souldiers blood
Drops downe • s current coyne in that hard purchase,
As his, whose much more delicate condition
Hath suckt the milke of ease. Iudgement commands,
But Resolution executes: I vse not
Before this royall presence, these fit sleights,
As in contempt of such as can direct:
My speech hath other end; not to attribute
All praise to one mans fortune, which is strengthed
By many hands. — For instance, here is Prophilus
A Gentleman (I cannot flatter truth)
Of much desert; and, though in other ranke,
Both Hemophil and Groneas were not missing
To wish their Countries peace; for in a word,
All there did striue their best, and 'twas our duty.
Courtiers turne souldiers?— we vouchsafe our hand.
Obserue your great example.
With all diligence.
Obsequiously and hourely.
Some repose
After these toyles are needfull • we must thinke on
Conditions for the Conquered; they expect 'em.
On, — come my Ithocles.
Sir with your fauour,
I need not a supporte • .
Fate instructs me.
With me?
Indeed I dare not stay.
Sweet Lady
Souldiers are blunt,— your lip.
Fye, this is rudenesse;
You went not hence such creatures.
Spirit of valour
Is of a mounting nature.
It appeares so:
Pray in earnest, how many men apeece
Haue you two beene the death of?
Faith not many;
We were compos'd of mercy.
For our daring
You heard the Generals approbation
Before the King.
You wish'd your Countries peace:
That shew'd your charity; where are your spoyles,
Such as the Souldier fights for?
They are comming.
By the next Carrier, are they not?
Sweet Philena,
When I was in the thickest of mine enemies,
Slashing off one mans head, anothers nose,
Anothers armes and legs.
And altogether.
Then would I with a sigh remember thee;
And cry deare Philena, 'tis for thy sake
I doe these deeds of wonder:— dost not lo • e me
With all thy heart now?
Now as heretofore.
I haue not put my loue to vse, the principall
Will hardly yeeld an Interest.
By Mar •
I'le marry thee.
By Vulcan y'are forsworne,
Except my mind doe alter strangely.
One word.
You lye beyond all modesty,— forbeare me.
I'le make thee mistresse of a City, 'tis
Mine owne by conquest.
By petition; sue for't
In Forma pauperis: — City? Kennell. Gallants
Off with your Fathers, put on aprons, Gallants;
Learne to reele, throm, or trim a Ladies dog,
And be good quiet soules of peace Hobgoblins.
Christalla?
Practise to drill hogs, in hope
To share in the Acorns. Souldiers? Corn • cutters;
But not so valiant: they oft times draw blood,
Which you durst neuer doe. When you have practis'd
More wit, or more civility, wee'll ranke 〈◊〉
I th list of men: till then, braue things at armes
Dare not to speake to vs, — most potent Groneas.
And Hemophill the hardy, — at your seruices.
They scorne vs as they did before we went.
Hang 'em, let vs scorne them, and be reueng'd.
Shall we?
We will; and when we sleight them thus,
Instead of following them, they'll follow vs.
It is a womans nature.
'Tis a s •• ruy one. exeunt o •• ies.
Tempt not the Stars (young man) thou canst not play
With the seuerity of Fate: this change
Of habit, and disguise in outward view,
Hides not the secrets of thy soule within thee,
From their quicke-piercing eyes, which dive at all times
Downe to thy thoughts: in thy aspect I note
A consequence of danger.
Giue me leaue
(Graue Tecnicus ) without fore-dooming destiny,
Vnder thy roofe to ease my silent griefes,
By applying to my hidden wounds, the balme
Of thy Oraculous Lectures: if my fortune
Run such a crooked by-way, as to wrest
My steps to ruine, yet thy learned precepts
Shall call me backe, and set my footings streight:
I will not court the world.
Ah Orgilus,
Neglects in young men of delights, and life,
Run often to extremities • they care not
For harmes to others, who contemne their owne.
But I (most learned Artist) am not so much
At ods with Nature, that I grutch the thrift
Of any true deseruer: nor doth malice
Of present hopes, so checke them with despaire,
As that I yeeld to thought of more affliction
Then what is incident to frailty: wherefore
Impute not this retired course of liuing
Some little time, to any other cause
Then what I iustly render: the information
Of an vnsetled minde, as the effect
Must clearely witnesse.
Spirit of truth inspire thee.
On these conditions I conceale thy change,
And willingly admit thee for an Auditor.
• lete my study.
I to contemplations:
In these delightfull walkes — thus metamorphiz'd,
I may without suspition hearken after
Penthe • s vsage, and Euphranias faith:
Loue! thou art full of mystery: the Deities
Themselues are not secure, in searching out
The secrets of those flames, which hidden wast
A breast, made tributary to the Lawes
Of beauty; Physicke yet hath neuer found
A remedy, to cure a Louers wound.
Ha? who are those that crosse yo • priuate walke
Into the shadowing groue, in amorous foldings?
My Sister; ô my Sister? 'tis Euphrania
With Prophilus, supported too; I would
It were an Apparition; Prophilus
Is Ithocles his friend: It strangely pusles me:
Againe? helpe me my booke; this Schollers habit
Must stand my priuilege • my mind is busie,
Mine eyes, and eares are open. walke by reading.
Doe not wast
The span of this stolne time (sent by the gods
For precious vse) in nicenesse! Bright Euphrania,
Should I repeat old vowes, or study new,
For purchase of beleefe to my desires —
D • sires?
My seruice, my integrity —
That's better.
I should but repeat a lesson
Oft conn'd without a prompter; but thine eyes,
My Loue is honourable —
So was mine
To my Penthea: chastly honourable.
Nor wants there more addition to my wish
Of happinesse, then hauing thee a wife,
Already sure of Ithoclas a friend,
Firme, and vn-alterable.
But a brother
More cruell then the graue.
What can you looke for
In answer to your noble protestations,
From an vnskilfull mayd, but language suited
To a diuided minde?
Hold out Euphranc • .
Know Prophilus, I neuer vnder-valued
(From the first time you mentioned worthy loue)
Your merit, meanes, or person: It had beene
A fault of iudgement in me, and a dulnesse
In my affections, not to weigh and thanke
My better Starres, that offered me the grace
Of so much blisfulnesse. For to speake truth,
The law of my desires kept equall pace
With yours, nor haue I left that resolution;
But onely in a word, what-euer choyce
Liues nearest in my heart, must first procure
Consent, both from my father, and my brother,
E're he can owne me his.
She is forsworne else.
Leaue me that taske.
My brother e're he par • ed
To Athens, had my oath.
Yes, yes, • a had sure.
I doubt not with the meanes the Court supplies,
But to preuaile at pleasure.
Very likely.
Meane time • best, dearest, I may build my hopes
On the foundation of thy constant suffrance
In any opposition.
Death shall sooner
Diuorce life, and the ioyes I haue in liuing,
Then my chast vowes from truth.
On thy faire hand
I seale the like.
There is no faith in woman —
Passion? ô be contain'd: my very heart strings
Are on the Tenters.
Sir, we are over-heard;
Cupid protect vs: 'twas a stirring (Sir)
Of some one neere.
Your feares are needlesse, Lady;
None haue accesse into these priuate pleasures,
Except some neere in Court, or bosome Student
From Tecnicus his Oratory; granted
By speciall fauour lately from the King
Vnto the graue Philosopher.
Me thinkes
I heare one talking to himselfe: I see him.
'Tis a poore Scholler, as I told you Lady.
I am discouered — Say it: is it possible
With a smooth tongue, a leering countenance,
Flattery, or force of reason (— I come t'ee Sir)
To turne, or to appease the raging Sea?
Answer to that, — your Art? what Art to catch
And hold fast in a net the Sunnes small Atomes?
No, no; they'll out, they'll out; ye may as easily
Out-run a Cloud, driuen by a Northerne blast,
As fiddle faddle so. Peace, or speake sense.
Call you this thing a Scholler? 'las hee's lunaticke.
Obserue him (sweet) 'tis but his recreation.
But will you heare a little Lyon are so teatchy,
You keepe no rule in argume • t; Philosophy
Workes not vpon impossibilities,
But naturall conclusions. — Mew? — absurd;
The metaphisicks are but speculations
Of the celestiall bodies, or such accidents
As not mixt perfectly, in the Ayre ingendred,
Appeare to vs vnnaturall; that's all.
Proue it; — yet with a reuerence to your grauity,
I'le baulke illiterate saw • inesse, submitting
My sole opinion to the touch of writers.
Now let vs fall in with him.
Ha ha ha.
These Apish boyes, when they but tast the Grammates,
And principals of Theory, imagine
They can oppose their teachers Confidence
Leads many into errors.
By your leaue Sir.
Are you a Scholler (friend?)
I am (gay creature)
With pardon of your Deities, a mushrome •
On whom the dew of heauen drops now and then:
The Sunne shines on me too, I than • e his beames,
Sometime I feele their warmth; and eat, and sleepe.
Does Tecnicus read to thee?
Yes forsooth,
He is my master surely, yonde • dore
Opens vpon his Study.
Happy creatures;
Such people toyle not (sweet) in heats of State,
Nor sinke in thawes of greatnesse: Their affections
Keepe order with the limits of their modesty:
Their loue is loue of vertue. — What's thy name?
Aplotes (s • mptuous master) a poore wretch.
Dost thou want any thing?
Books ( Venus ) books.
Lady, a new conceit comes in my thought,
And most auaileable for both our comforts.
My Lord.—
Whiles I endeuour to deserue
Your fathers blessing to our loues, this Scholler
May daily at some certaine houres attend,
What notice I can write of my successe,
Here in this groue, and giue it to your hands:
The like from you to me; so can we neuer,
Barr'd of our mutuall speech, want sure intelligence;
And thus our hearts may talke when our tongues cannot.
Occasion is most fauourable, vse it.
Aplotes, wilt thou wait vs twice a day;
At nine i'th morning, and at foure at night,
Here in this Bower, to conuey such letters
As each shall send to other? Doe it willingly,
Safely, and secretly, and I will furnish
Thy Study, or what else thou canst desire.
Ioue make me thankfull, thankfull, I beseech thee
Propitious Ioue, I will proue sure and trusty •
You will not faile me bookes.
Nor ought besides
Thy heart can wish. This Ladies name's Euphra • ea,
Mine Prophilus.
I haue a pretty memory,
It must proue my best friend. — I will not misse
One minute of the houres appointed.
Write
The bookes thou wouldst haue bought thee in a note,
Or take thy selfe some money.
No, no money:
Money to Schollers is a spirit inuisible,
We dare not finger it; or bookes, or nothing.
Bookes of what sort thou wilt: doe not forget
Our names.
I warrant 'ee, I warrant 'ee.
Smile Hymen on the grouth of our desires,
Wee'll feed thy torches with eternall fires. Exeunt. manet Org.
Put out thy Torches Hymen, or their light
Shall meet a darkenesse of eternall night.
Inspire me Mercury with swift deceits;
Ingenious Fate has lept into mine armes,
Beyond the compasse of my braine. — Mortality
Creeps on the dung of earth, and cannot reach
The riddles, which are purpos'd by the gods.
Great Arts best write themselues in their owne stories,
They dye too basely, who out-liue their glories. Exit.
I'le haue that window next the street dam'd vp;
It giues too full a prospect to temptation,
And courts a Gazers glances: there's a lust
Committed by the eye, that sweats, and t • a • els,
Plots, wakes, contriues, till the deformed bear-whelpe
Adultery be lick'd into the act,
The very act; that light shall be dam'd vp;
D'ee heare Sir?
I doe heare my Lord; a Mason
Shall be prouided suddenly.
Some Rogue,
Some Rogue of your confederacy, (factor
For slaues and strumpets) to conuey close packets
From this spruce springall, and the tother youngster;
That gawdy Eare-wrig, or my Lord, your Patron,
Whose p • usioner you are.— I'le teare thy throat out
Sonne of a Cat, ill-looking Hounds-head; tip vp
Thy vlterous maw, if I but scont a paper,
A scroll, but halfe as big as what can couer
A wart vpon thy nose, a spot, a pimple,
Directed to my Lady: it may proue
A mysticall preparatiue to lewdnesse.
Care shall be had. — I will turne euery thread
About me to an eye. — here's a sweet life.
The City houswiues, cunning in the traffique
Of Chamber-merchandise, set all at price
By whole-sale, yet they wipe their mouthes, and simper,
Cull, kisse, and cry Sweet-hart, and stro • ke the head
Which they haue branch'd, and all is well againe:
Dull clods of dirt, who dare not feele the rubs
Stucke on the fore-heads?
'Tis a villanous world,
One cannot hold his owne in't.
Dames at Court
Who flaunt in riots, runne another by as •
Their pleasure heaues the patient Asse that suffers
Vp on the stil • d of Office, titles, Incomes;
Promotion iustifies the shame, and • ues for't:
Poore Honour! thou art stab'd, and bleed'st to death
By such vnlawfull hire. The Count • y mistresse
Is yet more wary, and in blushes hides
What euer trespasse drawes her tro • h to guilt;
But all are false. On this truth I am bold,
No woman but can fall, and doth, or would —
Now for the newest newes about the Citie;
What blab the voyces sirrha?
O my Lord,
The rarest, quaintest, strangest, tickling newes
That euer —
Hey da, vp and ride me Rascall,
What is't?
Forsooth (they say) the King has mew'd
All his gray beard, in stead of which is budded
Another of a pure Carnation colour,
Speckled with Greene and Russet.
Ignorant blocke.
Yes truly, and 'tis talkt about the streets,
That since Lord Ithocles c • me home, the Lyons
Neuer left roaring, at which noyse the • eares
Haue danc'd their very hearts out.
Dance out thine too.
Besides, Lord Orgilus is fled to Athens
Vpon a fiery Dragon, and 'tis thought
A' neuer can returne.
Grant it Apollo.
Moreouer, please your Lordship, 'tis reported
For certaine, that who euer is found iealous
Without apparant proofe that's wife is wanton,
Shall be diuorc'd: but this is but she-newes,
I had it from a midwife. I haue more yet.
Anticke, no more; Ideots and stupid fooles
Grate my calamities. Why to be faire
Should yeeld presumption of a faulty soule?
Looke to the doores.
The horne of plenty crest him.
Swormes of confusion huddle in my thoughts
In rare distemper. Beauty? ô it is
An vnmatcht blessing, or a horrid curse.
Shee comes, she comes, so shoots the morning forth,
Spangled with pearles of transparent dew,
The way to pouerty is to be rich;
As I in her am wealthy, but for her
In all contents a Bankrupt. — Lou'd Penthea,
How fares my hearts best ioy?
In sooth not well,
She is so ouer-sad.
Leaue chattering Mag-pye.—
Thy brother is return'd (sweet) safe, and honour'd
With a Triumphant victory: thou shalt visit him:
We will to Court, where, if it be thy pleasure,
Thou shalt appeare in such a rauishing lustre
Of Iewels aboue value, that the Dames
Who braue it there, in rage to be out-shin'd,
Shall hide them in their Closets, and unseene
Fret in their teares; whiles euery wondring eye
Shall craue none other brightnesse but thy presence.
Choose thine owne recreations, be a Queene
Of what delights thou fa • ciest best, what company,
What place, what times, doe any thing, doe all things
Youth can command; so thou wilt 〈…〉
From the pure firmament of thy fai • e lookes •
Now 'tis well said my Lord, what Lady? laugh,
Be merry, time is precious.
Furies whip thee.
Alas my Lord, this language to your Hand-maid
Sounds as would musicke to the deafe: I need
No braueries nor cost of Art, to draw
The whitenesse of my name into offence;
Let such (if any such there are) who couet
A curiosity of admiration,
By laying out their plenty to full view,
Appeare in gawdy out-sides; my attires
Shall suit the inward fashion of my minde;
From which, if your opinion nobly plac'd,
Change not the Liuory your words bestow,
My Fortunes with my hopes are at the highest.
This house me thinkes stands somewhat too much inward •
It is too melancholy, wee'll remoue
Nearer the Court; or what thinks my Penthea
Of the delightfull Island we command?
Rule me as thou canst wish.
I am no Mistresse;
Whither you please, I must attend; all wayes
Are alike pleasant to me.
Island? prison:
A prison is as gaysome: wee'll no Islands:
Marry out vpon 'em, whom shall we see there?
Sea-guls, and Porpiseis, and water-rats,
And Crabs, and Mewes, and Dogfish? goodly geere
For a young Ladies dealing, or an old ones.
On no termes Islands, I'le be stew'd first.
Gransis,
You are a Iugling Bawd. — This sadnesse (sweetest)
Becomes not youthfull blood, — (I'le haue you pounded)
For my sake put on a more chearefull mirth,
Thou't marre thy cheekes, and make me old in griefes.
—(Damnable Bitch-foxe.)
I am thicke of hearing
Still when the wind blowes Southerly. What thinke 'e • ,
If your fresh Lady bre • d young bones (my Lord?)
Wood not a chopping boy d'ee good at heart?
But as you said,
〈1 line〉
Or chop thee into collo ••
Pray speake louder •
Sure, 〈◊〉 , the wind blowes South still,
Thou prai'st madly.
'Tis very hot, I sweat extreamely • — Now.
A heard of Lords, Sir.
Ha?
A 〈◊〉 of Indies.
Where?
Shoalds of horses.
Peasant, how?
Caroches
In drifts—th'one enter, th'other stand without, sir.
And now I vanish. Exit Phulas.
Noble Bassanes.
Most welcome Prophilus, Ladies, Gentlem • n,
To all, my heart is open, you all honour me.
(A tympany swe • s in my head a • r • ady)
Honour me bountifully. — (How they flutter,
W •• • ailes and • ayes together?)
From your brother,
By virtue of your loue to him, I require
Your instant presence faire • h
He is woll Sir.
The gods preserue him euer: yet (deare beauty)
I finde some alteration in him lately,
Since his returne to Sparta. My good Lord,
I pray vse no delay.
We had not needed
An inuitation, if his sisters health
Had not fallen into question. — Hast Penthea,
Slacke not a minute: lead the way good Prophilus,
I'le follow step by step •
Your arme faire Madam.
One word with your old Bawdship: th' hadst bin better
Raild at the sinnes thou worshipst, thou haue thwarted
My will. I'le vse thee cursedly.
You dote.
You are beside your selfe. A Politician
In iealousie? No, y'are too grosse, too vulgar.
Pish, teach not me my trade, I know my • ue:
My crossing you, sinks me into her trust,
By which I shall know all: my • rade's a sure one.
Forgiue me, Gransis, twas consideration
I rellisht not, but haue a care now.
Feare not,
I am no new-come-too't.
Thy life's vpon it,
And so is mine. My Agonies are infinite. Exeunt omnes:
Ambition? 'tis of vipers breed, it knawes
A passage through the wombe that gaue it motion.
Ambition? like a seeled Doue, mounts vpward,
Higher and higher still to pearch on clouds,
But tumbles headlong downe with heauier ruine.
So squibs and crackers flye into the ayre,
Then onely breaking with a noyse, they vanish
In stench and smoke: Morality appli'd
To timely practice, keeps the soule in tune,
At whose sweet musicke all our actions dance;
But this is forme of books, and schoole-tradition,
I • physicks not the sicknesse of a minde
Broken with grief •• : strong Fe •• ers are not eas'd
With counsell, but with be •• receipts, and meane • :
Meanes, speedy meanes, and certaine; that's the cure.
You sticke (Lord Crotolon ) vpon a point
Too nice, and too vnnecessary. Prophi • us
Is euery way desertfull. I am confident
Your wisdome is too 〈◊〉 to need instruction
From your 〈…〉
• et not so ripe
(My Lord Armoster ) th • t • t dares to do • e
Vpon the painte • 〈…〉 smooth perswasion,
Which tempts me to breach of faith.
Not yet
Resolu'd (my Lo ••• ) 〈…〉 consent
Be so auaileable, wee'll wri •• to 〈◊〉
For his 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 . The Kings 〈◊〉
Will ioyne with our d ••• res, he • as beene ••• 'd too • .
Yes, and the King himselfe • mportun'd Crotol ••
For a dispatch.
〈…〉 command, their wil •
Are Lawes not to be questioned.
By this marriage
You k • it an union so denout, so hearty,
Betweene your loues to me, and mine to yours,
As if mine owne blood had an interest in it;
For Prop • ilus is mine, and I am his.
My Lord, my Lord.
What, good Sir? speak your thoght.
Had this sincerity beene reall once,
My Orgilus had not beene now vn-wi • 'd,
Nor • our lost Sister buried in a Bride bed.
Your Vnckle here, Armoster knowes this truth,
For had your father Thrasus liu'd, but peace
Dwell in his graue: I haue done.
Y'are bold and bitter.
'A presses home the iniury, it smarts;
No reprehensions Vncle, I deserue 'em.
Yet gentle Sir, consider what the heat
Of an vnsteady youth a giddy bra •• e,
Greene indiscretion, flattery of greatnesse,
Rawnesse of iudgement, wilfulnesse in folly,
Thoughts vagrant as the wind, and as vncertaine
Might lead a boy in yeeres too; 'twas a fault,
A Capitall fault, for then I could not diue
Into the secrets of commanding Loue:
Since when, experience by the extremities (in others)
Hath forc'd me to collect. And trust me Crotolon,
I will redeeme those wrongs with any seruice
Your satisfaction can require for currant.
Thy acknowledgement is satisfaction.
What would you more?
I'me conquer'd: if E • phra •••
Her selfe admit the motion, let it be so.
I doubt not my sonnes liking.
Vse my fortunes,
Life, power, sword, and heart, all are your owne.
The Princesse with your sister.
I present 'e •
A stranger here in Court (my Lord,) for did not
Desire of seeing you, draw her abroad,
We had not beene made happy in her company.
You are a gracious Princesse.— Sister, wedlocke
Holds too seuere a passion in your nature,
Which can engrosse all duty to your husband,
Without attendance on so dea • a mistresse.
'Tis not my brothers pleasure, I presume,
T' immure her in a chamber.
'Tis her will,
Shee gouernes her owne houres; (noble Ithocles )
We thanke the gods for your successe, and welfare.
Our Lady has of • ate beene indispos'd,
Else we had waited on you with the first.
How does Penthea now?
You best know brother,
From whom my health and comfort • are deriu'd.
I like the answer well; 'tis sad, and modest;
There may be tricks, yet, tricks.— Haue an eye Gransis.
Now Crotolon, the suit we ioyn'd in must not
Fall by too long demurre.
'Tis granted, Princesse,
For my part.
With condition, that his sonne
Fauour the Contract.
Such delay is easie.
The ioyes of marriage make thee, Prophilus,
A proud deseruer of Euphrama's loue,
And her of thy desert.
Most sweetly gracious.
The ioyes of marriage are the heauen on earth,
Life's paradise (great Princesse) the soules quiet,
Sinewes of concord, earthly immortality,
Eternity of pleasures; no restoratiues
Like to a constant woman. — (but where i • she?
'Twould puzzle all the gods, but to create
Such a new monster.) — I can speake by proofe,
For I rest in Elizium, 'tis my happinesse.
Euphrania how are you resolu'd, (speake freely)
In your affections to this Gentlem • n?
Nor more, nor lesse th • n a • his loue assures me,
Which (if your li • ing with my •••• hers warrants)
I cannot but approue in all point • worthy.
So, so, I know your answer.
'T had bin pitty
To sunder hearts so equally consented.
The King (Lord Ithocles ) commands your presence;
And (fairest Princesse) yours.
We will attend him.
Where are the Lords? all must vnto the King
Without delay: the Prince of Argos —
Well Sir.
Is comming to the Court, sweet Lady.
How!
The Prince of Argos ?
'Twas my fortune, Madam,
T' enioy the honour of these happy tidings.
Penthe • !
Brother!
Let me an howre hence
Meet you alone, within the Palace groue,
I haue some secret with you — Prethe friend
Conduct her thither, and haue speciall care
The walks be clear'd of any to disturbe vs.
I shall.
How's that?
Alone, pray be alone.
I am your creature, princesse.— on my Lords. Exeunt.
Alone, alone? what meanes that word alone?
Why might not I be there? — hum! — hee's her brother;
Brothers and sisters are but flesh and blood,
And this same whorson Court ease is temp •• tion
To a rebellion in the veines • — Besides,
His fine friend Prophilu • mus • be her guardian.
Why may not he dispatch a businesse nimbly
Before the other come? — or — pa •• ring, pandring,
For one another? bee't to sister, mother,
Wife, Couzen, any thing, 'mongst youths of met • all,
Is in request: It is so — stubborne Fate:
But if I be a Cuckold, and can know it,
I will be fell, and fell.
My Lord, y'are call'd for.
Most hartily I thanke y • , 〈◊〉 my wi • e pray?
Retir'd amongst the 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 thanke • ee •
There's an old waiter with 〈◊〉 •• w you 〈◊〉 ?
She 〈…〉 p • esence Lobby fast a •• e • pe • ir.
Asleepe? sleepe Sir •
Is your Lordship troubled •
You will not to the King?
Your humblest Vassaile.
Your seruant my good Lord.
I wait your foot st • ps.
In this walke (Lady) will your brother find you:
And with your fauour, giue me le •• e a little
To worke a preparation, in his fashion
I haue obseru'd of late, some kind of slacknesse
To such alacrity as Nature
And custome tooke delight in: Sadnesse growes
Vpon his recreations, which he he h •• rds
In such a willing silence, that to question
The grounds will argue skill in friendship,
And lesse good manners.
Sir, I'me not inquisitiue
Of secrecies without an inuitation.
With pardon, Lady, not a sillable
Of mine implyes so rude a sense; the drift.—
Doe thy best
To make this Lady me • ry for an hour • . Exit.
Your will shall be a law, Sir.
Prethe leaue me,
I haue some priuate thoughts I would account with:
Vse thou thine owne.
Speake on, faire nimph, our soules
Can dance as well to musick • of the Spheares
As any's who haue feasted with the gods.
Your Schoole terms are too troublesome.
What heauen
Refines mortality from drosse of earth,
But such as vncompounded beauty hallowes
With glorified perfection.
Set thy wits
In a lesse wild proportion.
Time can neuer
On the white table of vnguilty faith
Write counterfeit dishonour; turne those eyes
(The arrowes of pure loue) vpon that fire
Which once rose to a flame, perfum'd with vowes
As sweetly scented as the L • cense smoking like
The holiest A • tars, Virgin teares
On Vesta's odours) sprinkled dewes to feed 'em,
And to increase their feruour.
Be not franticke.
All pleasures are but meere imagination,
Feeding the hungry appetite with steame,
And sight of banquet, whilst the body pines,
Not relishing the reall tast of food,
Such is the le • nnesse of a heart diuided
From entercourse of troth-contracted lones;
No horror should deface that precious figure
Seal'd with the liuely stampe of equall soules.
Away, some fury hath bewitch'd thy tongue:
The breath of ignorance that flyes from thence,
Ripens a knowledge in me of afflictions,
Aboue all suffrance. — Thing of talke be gone,
Be gone without reply.
Be iust, Penthea,
In thy commands: when thou send'st forth a doome
Of banishment, know first on whom it lights;
Thus I take off the shrowd, in which my cares
Are folded vp from view of common eyes;
What is thy sentence next?
Rash man, thou layest
A blemish on mine honour with the hazard
Of thy too desperate life: yet I professe,
By all the Lawes of ceremonious wedlocke,
I haue not giuen admittance to one thought
Of female change, since cruelty enforc'd
Diuorce betwixt my body and my heart:
Why would you fall from goodnesse thus?
O rather
Examine me how I could liue to say
I haue bin much, much wrong'd; 'tis for thy sake
I put on this Imposture; deare Penthea,
If thy soft bosome be not turn'd to marble,
Thou't pitty our calamities; my Interest
Confirmes me thou art mine still.
Lend your hand:
With both of mine I claspe it thus, thus kisse it,
Thus kneele before ye.
You instruct my duty.
We may stand vp: Haue you ought else to vrge
Of new demand? as for the old forget it,
'Tis buried in an everlasting silence,
And shall be, shall be euer; what more would ye?
I would possesse my wife, the equity
Of very reason bids me.
Is that all?
Why 'tis the all of me my selfe.
Remo • e
Your steps some distance from me; at this space
A few words I dare change; but first put on
Your borrowed shape.
You are obey'd, 'tis done •
How (Orgilus) by promise I was thine,
The heauens doe witnesse; they can witnesse too
A rape done on my truth: how I doe loue the •
Yet Orgilus, and yet, must best appeare
In tendering thy freedome; for I find
The constant preseruation of thy merit,
By thy not daring to attempt my fame
With iniury of any loose conceit,
Which might giue deeper wounds to discontents:
Continue this faire race, then though I cannot
Adde to thy comfort, yet I shall more often
Remember from what fortune I am fallen,
And pitty mine owne ruine. — Liue, li • e happy.
Happy in thy next choyce, that thou maist people
This barren age with vertues in thy issue:
And ô, when thou art married, thinke on me
With mercy, not contempt: I hope thy wife,
Hearing my story, will not scorne my fall:
Now let vs part.
Part! yet aduise thee better:
Penthea is the wife to Orgilus,
And euer shall be.
Neuer shall nor will.
How!
Heare me, in a word I'le tell thee why •
The Virgin dowry which my birth bestow'd,
Is rauish'd by another: my true loue
Abhorres to thinke, that Orgilus deseru'd
No better fauours then a second bed.
I must not take this reason.
To confirme it,
Should I outliue my bondage, let me meet
Another worse then this, and lesse desir'd,
If of all the men aliue thou shouldst but touch
My lip, or hand againe.
Penthea, now
I tell 'ee you grow wanton in my sufferance;
Come sweet, th'art mine.
Vnciuill Sir, forbeare,
Or I can turne affection into vengeance;
Your reputation (if you value any)
Lyes bleeding at my feet. Vnworthy man,
If euer henceforth thou appeare in language,
Message, or letter to betray my frailty,
I'le call thy former protestations lust,
And curse my Starres for forfeit of my iudgement.
Goe thou, sit onely for disguise and walkes,
To hide thy shame: this once I spare thy life;
I laugh at mine owne confidence; my sorrowes
By thee are made inferiour to my fortunes.
If euer thou didst harbour worthy loue,
Dare not to answer. My good Genius guide me,
That I may neuer see thee more. — Goe from me.
I'e teare my vaile of politicke French off,
And stand vp like a man resolu'd to doe
Action, not words shall shew me. O Penthea. Exit Orgilus.
'A sigh'd my name sure as he parted from me,
I feare I was too rough: Alas poore Gentleman,
'A look'd not like the ruines of his youth,
But like the ruines of those ruines: Honour,
How much we fight with weaknesse to preserue thee.
Fye on thee, damb thee, rotten magot, damb thee,
Sleepe? sleepe at Court? and now? Aches, convulsions,
Impostumes, themes, gouts, palsies clog thy bones
A dozen yeeres more yet.
Now y'are in humors.
Shee's by her selfe, there's hope of that; shee's sad too,
Shee's in strong contemplation: yes, and • ixt.
The signes are wholesome.
Very wholsome truly.
Hold your chops night mare.— Lady, come your brother
Is carried to his closet; you must thither.
Not well, my Lord?
A sudden • it, 'twill off;
Some surfeit or disorder. — How doest d • erest?
Your newes is none o'th best.
The chiefe of men,
The excellentest Ithocles, desires
Your presence Madam.
We are hasting to him.
In vaine we labour in this course of life
To piece our iourney out at length, or craue
Respite of breath, our home is in the graue.
Perfect Philosophy: then let vs care
To liue so that our reckonings may fall euen
When w' are to make account.
He cannot feare
Who builds on noble grounds: sicknesse or paine
Is the deseruers exercise, and such
Your vertuous brother to the world is knowne.
Speake comfort to him Lady, be all gentle;
Starres fall but in the grossenesse of our sight,
A good man dying, th' Earth doth lose a ligh • . Exeunt omnes.
BE well aduis'd, let not a resolution
Of giddy rashnesse choake the breath of reason.
It shall not, most sage Master.
I am iealous:
For if the borrowed shape so late put on,
Inferr'd a consequence, we must conclude
Some violent designe of sudden nature
Hath shooke that shadow off, to flye vpon
A new-hatch'd execution: Orgilus,
Take heed thou hast not (vnder our integrity)
Shrowded vnlawfull plots: our mortall eyes
Pierce not the secrets of your hearts, the god •
Are onely priuie to them.
Learned Tecnicus,
Such doubts are causelesse, and to cleere the truth
From misconceit, the present State commands me.
The Prince of Argos comes himselfe in person
In quest of great Calantha for his Bride,
Our kingdomes heire; besides, mine onely sister
Euphrania is dispos'd to Prophilus.
Lastly, the King is sending letters for me
To Athens, for my quicke repaire to Court.
Please to accept these Reasons.
Iust ones, Orgilus,
Not to be contradicted: yet beware
Of an vnsure foundation; no faire colours
Can fortifie a building faintly ioynted.
I haue obseru'd a growth in thy aspect
Of dangerous extent, sudden, and ( • ooke too't)
I might adde certaine —
My aspect? could Art
Runne through mine inmost thoughts, it should not sift
An inclination there, more then what suited
With iustice of mine honour.
I beleeue it.
But know then Orgilus what honour is:
Honour consists not in a bare opinion
By doing any act that feeds content;
Braue in appearance, 'cause we thinke it braue:
Such honour comes by accident, not nature
Proceeding from the vices of our passion
Which makes our reason drunke. But reall Honour
Is the reward of vertue, and acquir'd
By Iustice or by •• lour, which for Bases
Hath Iustice to vphold it. He then failes
In honour, who for lucre of Reuenge
Commits thefts, murthers, Treasons and Adulteries,
With such like, by intrenching on iust Lawes,
Whose sou'raignty is best preseru'd by Iustice.
Thus as you see how honour must be grounded
On knowledge, not opinion: For opinion
Relyes on probability and Accident,
But knowledge on Necessity and Truth:
I leaue thee to the fit consideration
Of what becomes the grace of reall Honour.
Wishing successe to all thy vertuous meanings.
The gods increase thy wisdome (reuerend Oracle)
And in thy precepts make me euer thrifty. Exit Org.
I thanke thy wish. — Much mystery of Fate
Lyes hid in that mans fortunes, Curiosity
May lead his actions into rare attempts;
But let the gods be moderators still,
No humane power can preuent their will.
From whence come 'ee?
From King Amycl •• ; (pardon
My interruption of your Studies) — Here
In this seal'd box he sends a treasure deare
To him as his Crowne, 'a prayes your grauity
You would examine, ponder, si • t and bolt
The pith and circumstance of euery tittle
The scroll within containes.
What is't Armostes ?
It is the health of Sparta, the Kings life,
Sinewes and safety of the Common-wealth,
The summe of what the Oracle deliuer'd,
When last he visited the propheticke Temple
At Delph • s ; what his reasons are for which
After so long a silence he requires
You counsaile now (graue man) his maiesty
Will soone himselfe acquaint you with.
Apollo
Inspire my Intellect. — The Prince of Argos
Is entertain'd.
He is, and has demanded
Our Princesse for his wife; which I conceive
One speciall cause the King importunes you
For resolution of the Oracle.
My duty to the King, good peace to Sparta,
And faire day to Armostes.
Like to Tecnicus.
CAn you paint a thought? or number
Euery fancy in a slumber?
Can you count soft minutes rouing
From a dyals point by mouing?
Can you graspe a sigh? or lastly,
Rob a Virgins honour chastly?
No, ô no; yet you may
Sooner doe both that and this,
This and that, and neuer misse,
Then by any praise display
Beauties beauty, such a glory
As beyond all Fate, all Story,
All armes, all arts,
All loues, all hearts,
Greater then tho • e, or they,
Doe, shall, and must obey.
All silent, calme, secure.— Gransis, no creaking?
No noyse; dost heare nothing?
Not a mouse,
Or whisper of the winde.
The floore is matted,
The bed-posts sure are steele or marble. — Souldiers
Should not affect (me thinkes) straines so e •• eminate;
Sounds of such delicacy are but fawnings
Vpon the floth of Luxury: they heighten
Cinders of couert lust vp to a flame.
What doe you meane (my Lord) speak low; that gabling
Of yours will but vndoe vs.
Chamber-combats
Are felt, not hard.
A wakes.
What's that?
Who's there
Sister? all quit the roome else.
'Tis consented.
Lord Bassanes, your brother would be priuate,
We must forbeare; his sleepe hath newly left him.
Please 'ee withdraw?
By any meanes, 'tis fit.
Pray Gentlewoman walke too.
Yes, I will Sir.
Sit nearer sister to me, nearer yet;
We had one Father, in one wombe tooke life,
Were brought vp twins together, yet haue liu'd
At distance like two strangers. I could wish
That the first pillow whereon I was cradell'd,
Had prou'd to me a graue.
You had beene happy:
Then had you neuer knowne that sinne of life
Which blots all following glories with a vengeance,
For forfeiting the last will of the dead,
From whom you had your being.
Sad Penthea,
Thou canst not be too cruell; my rash spleene
Hath with a violent hand pluck'd from thy bosome
A louer-blest heart, to grind it into dust,
For which mine's now a breaking.
Not yet, heauen
I doe beseech thee: first let some wild fires
Scorch, not consume it; may the heat be cherisht
With desires infinite, but hopes impossible.
Wrong'd soule, thy prayers are heard.
Here lo I breathe
A miserable creature led to ruine
By an vnnaturall brother.
I consume
In languishing affections for that trespasse,
Yet cannot dye.
The handmaid to the wages,
The vntroubled of Country toyle, drinkes streames
With leaping kids, and with the bleating lambes;
And so allayes her thirst secure, whiles I
Quench my hot sighes with fleerings of my teares.
The labourer doth eat his coursest bread,
Earn'd with his sweat, and lyes him downe to sleepe;
Which euery bit I touch turnes in disgestion
To gall, as bitter as Penthea's curse.
Put me to any pennance for my tyranny,
And I will call thee mercifull.
Pray kill me,
Rid me from liuing with a iealous husband,
Then we will ioyne in friendship, be againe
Brother and sister. — Kill me pray: nay, will 'ee?
How does thy Lord esteeme thee?
Such an one
As onely you haue made me; a faith-breaker,
A spotted whore, forgiue me; I am one
In art, not in desires, the gods must witnesse.
Thou dost be lye thy friend.
I doe not Ithocles •
For she that's wife to Orgilus, and liues
In knowne Adultery with Bassanes,
Is at the best a whore. Wilt kill me now?
The ashes of our parents will assume
Some dreadfull figure, and appeare to charge
Thy bloody gilt, that hast betray'd their name
To infamy, in this reproachfull match.
After my victories abroad, at home
I meet despaire; ingratitude of nature
Hath made my actions monstrous: thou shalt stand
A Deity (my sister) and be worship'd,
For thy resolued martyrdome: wrong'd maids,
And married wiues shall to thy hallowed shrine
Offer their orisons, and sacrifice
Pure Turtles crown'd with mirtle, if thy pitty
Vnto a yeelding brothers pressure, lend
One finger but to ease it.
O no more.
Death waits to waft me to the Stygian bankes,
And free me from this Chaos of my bondage,
And till thou wilt forgiue, I must indure.
Who is the Saint you ser • e?
Friendship, or
Of birth to any but my sister, durst not
Haue mou'd that question as a secret, Sister:
I dare not murmure to my selfe.
Let me,
By your new protestations I coniure 'ee,
Partake her name.
Her name,— 'tis, — 'tis, I dare not.
All your respects are forg'd.
They are not.—Peace
Calantha is the Princesse, the Kings daughter,
Sol • heire of Sparta — Me most miserable,
Doe I now loue thee? for my iniuries
Reuenge thy selfe with brauery, and gossip
My treasons to the Kings eares. Doe; Calant ••
Knowes it not yet, nor Prophilus my nearest.
Suppose you were contracted to her, would it not
Split euen your very soule to see her father
Snatch her out of your armes against her will,
And force her on the Prince of Argos?
Trouble not
The fountaines of mine eyes with thine owne story,
I sweat in blood for't.
We are reconcil'd:
Alas, Sir, being children, but two branches
Of one stocke, 'tis not fit we should diuide:
Haue comfort, you may find it.
Yes in thee:
Onely in thee Penthea mine.
If sorrowes
Haue not too much dul • 'd my infected braine,
I'le cheere inuention for an actiue straine.
Mad man! why haue I wrong'd a maid so excellent?
I can forbeare no longer: more, I will not;
Keepe off your hands, or fall vpon my point:
Patience is tyr'd, for like a slow-pac'd Asse
Ye ride my easie nature, and proclaime
My sloth to vengeance, a reproach and property.
The meaning of this rudenesse.
Hee's distracted.
O my grieu'd Lord.
Sweet Lady come not neere him •
He holds his perilous weapon in his hand
To pricke 'a cares not whom, nor where,— see, see, see.
My birth is noble, though the popular blast
Of vanity, as giddy as thy youth,
Hath rear'd thy name vp to bestride a cloud,
Or progresse in the Chariot of the Sunne;
I am no clod of trade, to lackey pride,
Nor like your slaue of expectation wait
The baudy hinges of your dores, or whist ••
For mysticall conueyance to your bed-sports.
Fine humor • , they become him.
How 'a stares,
Struts, puffes, and sweats: most admirable lunacy?
But that I may conceiue the spirit of wine
Has tooke possession of your soberer custome,
I'de say you were vnmannerly.
Deare brother.
Vnmannerly — Mew Kitling— smooth formality
Is vsher to the ranknesse of the blood,
But Impudence beares vp the traine: Indeed, sir,
Your fiery mettall, or your springall blaze
Of huge renowne, is no sufficient Royalty
To print vpon my forehead the scorne Cuckold.
His Iealousie has rob'd him of his wits,
'A talkes 'a knowes not what.
Yes, and 'a knowes
To whom 'a talkes; to one that franks his lust
In Swine-security of bestiall incest.
Hah deuill.
I will hallo't, though I blush more
To name the filthinesse, than thou to act it.
Monster!
Sir by our friendship.
By our bloods,
Will you quite both vndoe vs, Brother?
Out on him,
These are his megrims, firks and melancholies.
Well said, old Touch-hole.
Kick him out at dores.
With fauour let me speake.— My Lord? what slacknesse
In my obedience hath deseru'd this rage?
Except humility and sin lent duty
Haue drawne on your vnquiet, my simplicity
Ne're studied your vexation.
Light of beauty,
Deale not vngently with a desperate wound!
No breach of reason dares make warre with her
Whose lookes are soueraignty, whose breath is balme
O that I could preserue thee in fruition
As in deuotion!
Sir, may euery euill
Lock'd in Pandora's box; showre (in your presence)
On my vnhappy head, if since you made me
A partner in your bed, I haue beene faulty
In one vnseemely thought against your honour.
Purge not his g •• e • e • , Penthea.
Yea, 〈◊〉 on,
Excellent creature— Good be not a hinderance
To peace, and praise of vertue. — O my senses
Are charm'd with sounds caelestiall. — On, deare, on •
I neuer gaue you one ill word; say, did I?
Indeed I did not.
Nor, by Iuno's forehead,
Was I e're guilty of a wanton error.
A goddesse, let me kneele.
Alas kind Animall.
No, but for p • nnance.
Noble sir, what is it?
With gladnesse I embrace it; yet pray let not
My rashnesse teach you to be too vnmercifull.
When you shall shew good proofe that manly wisdome •
Not ouer-sway'd by passion, or opinion,
Knowes how to lead iudgement; then this Lady
Your wife, my sister, shall returne in safety
Home to be guided by you, but till first
I can, out of cleare euidence approue it,
Shee shall be my care.
Rip my bosome vp •
I'le stand the execution with a constancy:
This torture is vnsufferable.
Well Sir,
I dare not trust her to your fury.
But
Penthea sayes not so.
She needs no tongue
To plead excuse, who neuer purpos'd wrong.
Virgin of reuerence and antiquity
Stay you behind.
The Court wants not yo • r diligence.
What will you doe my Lord? my Lady's gone,
I am deny'd to follow.
I may see her.
Or speake to her once more.
And feele her too, man,
Be of good cheare, she's your owne flesh and bone.
Diseases desperate must find cures alike:
She swore she has beene true.
True on my modesty.
Let him want truth who credits not her vowes •
Much wrong I did her, but her brother infinite;
Rumor will voyce me the contempt of manhood,
Should I run on thus. Some way I must try
To out-doe Art, and cry a Iealousie. Exeunt omnes.
Cozen of Argos, what the heauens haue pleas'd
In their vnchanging Counsels to conclude
For both our kingdomes weale, we must submit to:
Nor can we be vnthankfull to their bounties,
Who when we were euen creeping to our graues,
Sent vs a daughter; in whose birth, our hope
Continues of succession: As you are
In title next, being grandchilde to our Aunt,
So we in hear • desire you may sit nearest
Calantha's loue; since we haue euer vow'd
Not to inforce affection by our will,
But by her owne choyce to confirme it gladly.
You speake the nature of a right iust father:
I come not hither roughly to demand
My Cozens thraldome, but to free mine owne:
Report of great Calantha's beauty, vertue,
Sweetnesse, and singular perfections, courted
All eares to credit what I finde was publish'd
By constant truth: from which if any seruice
Of my desert can purchase faire construction,
This Lady must command it.
Princely Sir,
So well you know how to professe obseruance
That you instruct your hearers to become
Practitioners in duty; of which number
I'le study to be chiefe.
Chiefe, glorious Virgine,
In my deuotions, as in all mens wonder.
Excellent Cozen, we deny no libertie •
Vse thine owne opportunities. — Armoste • ,
We must consult with the Philosophers,
The businesse is of weight.
Sir, at your pleasure •
You told me, Crotolon, your sonne's return'd
From Athens ? wherefore comes 'a not to Cou • t
As we commanded?
He shall soone attend
Your royall will, great Sir.
The marr • age
Betweene young Prophilus and Euphranea,
Tafts of too much delay:
My Lord.
Some pleasures
At celebration of it would giue life
To th' entertainment of the Prince our kinsman
Our Court weares grauity more then we rellish.
Yet the heauens smile on all your high attempts,
Without a Cloud.
So may the gods protect vs.
A Prince, a subiect?
Yes, to beauties scepter •
As all hearts kneele so mine.
You are too Courtly.
Your safe returne to Sparta is most welcome,
I ioy to meet you here, and as occasion
Shall grant vs priuacy, will yeeld you reason •
Why I should couet to deserue the title
Of your respected friend: for without Complement
Beleeue it, Orgilus, 'tis my ambition.
Your Lordship may command me your poore seruant.
So amorously close close? — so soone? — my heart!
What sudden change is next?
Life to the King,
To whom I here present this Noble gentleman,
New come from Athens ; Royall Sir, vouchsafe
Your gracious hand in fauour of his merit.
My sonne preferr'd by Ithocles!
Our bounties
Shall open to thee Orgilus ; for instance,
Harke in thine eare; if out of thos • inuentions
Which flow in Athens, thou hast there ingrost
Some rarity of wit to grace the Nuptials
Of thy faire sister, and renowne our Court
In th' eyes of this young Prince, we shall be debtor
To thy conceit, thinke on't •
Your Highnesse honors me.
My tongue and heart are twins.
A noble birth
Becomming such a father. — worthy Orgilus,
You are a guest most with'd for.
May my duty
Still rise in your opinion, sacred Princesse.
Euphranea's brother, sir, a Gentleman
Well worthy of your knowledge.
We embrace him,
Proud of so deare acquaintance.
All prepare
For Reuels and disport: the ioyes of Hymen,
Like Phoebus in his lustr • , puts to flight
All mists of dulnesse; crowne the houres with gladnesse:
No sounds but musicke, no discourse but mirth.
Thine arme I prethe Ithocles. — Nay, good
My Lord keepe on your way, I am prouided.
I dare not disobey.
Most heauenly Lady. Exeunt.
The King hath spoke his mind.
His will he hath •
But were it lawfull to hold plea against
The power of greatnesse, not the reason, haply
Such vnder-shrubs as subiects, sometimes might
Borrow of Nature, Iustice, to informe
That licence soueraignty holds without checke
Ouer a meeke obedience.
How resolue you
Touching your sisters marriage? Prophilus
Is a deseruing, and a hopefull youth.
I enuy not his merit, but applaud it:
Could with him thrift in all his best desires,
And with a willingnesse inleague our blood
With his, for purchase of full growth in friendship •
He neuer touch'd on any wrong that malic'd
The honour of our house, nor stirr'd our peace;
Yet, with your fauour, let me not forget
Vnder whose wing he gathers warmth and comfort,
Whose creature he is bound, made, and must liue so.
Sonne, sonne, I find in thee a harsh condition,
No curtesie can winne it; 'tis too ranckorous.
Good Sir be not seuere in your construction,
I am no stranger to such easie calmes
As sit in tender bosomes: Lordly Ithocles
Hath grac'd my entertainment in abundance;
Too humbly hath descended from that height
Of arrogance and spleene which wrought the rape
On grieu'd Penthea's purity; his scorne
Of my vntoward fortunes is reclaim'd
Vnto a Coutship, almost to a fawning:
I'le kisse his foot, since you will haue it so.
Since I will haue it so? Friend I will haue it so
Without our ruine by your politike plot • ,
Or Wolfe of hatred snarling in your breasts
You haue a spirit, Sir, haue ye? a familiar
That poasts i'th ayre for your intelligence?
Some such Hobgoblin hurried you from Athens,
For yet you come vnsent for.
If vnwelcome,
I might haue found a graue there.
Sure your businesse
Was soone dispatch'd, or your mind alter'd quickly.
'Twas care, Sir, of my health, cut short my iourney;
For there, a generall infection
Threatens a desolation.
And I feare
Thou hast brought backe a worse infection with thee,
Infection of my mind; which, as thou sayst,
Threatens the desolation of our family.
Forbid it our deare Genius, I will rather
Be made a Sacrifice on Thrasus monument,
Or kneele to Ithocles his sonne in dust,
Then wooe a fathers curse: My sisters marriage
With Prophilus, is from my heart confirm'd:
May I liue hated, may I dye despis'd,
If I omit to further it in all
That can concerne me.
I haue beene too rough,
My duty to my King made me so earnest;
Excuse it Orgilus.
Deare Sir •
H •• e comes
Euphranea, with Prophilus and Ithocles.
Most honored — euer famous.
Your true friend,
On earth not any true • . — With s •• oth eyes
Looke on this worthy couple, you • consen •
Can onely make them one.
They haue it. — Sister,
Thou pawn'dst to me an oath, of which ingagement
I neuer will release thee, if thou aym'st
At any other choyce then this.
Deare brother,
At him or none.
To which my blessing's • dded.
Which till a greater ceremony perfect,
Euphran • a lend thy hand; here take her Prophilus,
Liue long a happy man and wife; and further,
That these in presence may conclude an omen,
Thus for a Bridall song I close my wishes:
Comforts lasting, Loues increasing,
Like soft houres neuer ceasing;
Plenties pleasure, peace complying
Without iarres, or tongues enuying;
Hearts by holy Vnion wedded
More then theirs by custome bedded;
Fruitfull issues: life so graced,
Not by age to be defaced;
Budding, as the yeare ensu'th,
Euery spring another youth :
All what thought can adde beside,
Crowne this Bridegroome and this Bride.
You haue seal'd ioy close to my soule: Euphranea,
Now I may call thee mine.
I but exchange
One good friend for another.
If these Gallants
Will please to grace a poore inuention,
By ioyning with me in some • light deuise,
I'le venture on a straine, my younger dayes
Haue studied for delight •
With thankfull willingnesse
I offer my attendance.
No endeuour
Of mine shall faile to shew it selfe.
We will
All ioyne to wait on thy directions, Orgilus.
O my good Lord, your fauours flow towards
A too vnworthy worme; but as you please,
I am what you will shape me.
A fast friend.
I thanke thee sonne for this acknowledgemen • ,
It is a sight of gladnesse.
But my duty. Exe •• t omnes.
Who e're would speake with vs deny his entrance •
Be carefull of our charge.
We shall m • dam.
Except the King himselfe, 〈◊〉 none admittance,
Not any.
Madam it shall be our care. Ex • unt •
Being alone, Penthea, you haue granted
The oportunity you sought, and might
At all times haue commanded.
'Tis a benefit •
Which I shall owe your goodnesse euen in death for •
My glasse of life (sweet Princesse hath few minutes
Remaining to runne downe; the sands are spent;
For by an inward messenger I feele
The summons of departure short and certaine.
You feed too much your melancholly.
Glorie •
Of humane greatnesse are but pleasing dreames,
And shadowes soone decaying: on the stage
Of my mortality, my youth hath acted
Some scenes of vanity, drawne out at length
By varied pleasures, sweetned in the mixture,
But Tragicall in issue; Beauty, pompe,
With euery sensuality our giddinesse
Doth frame an Idoll, are vnconstant friends
When any troubled passion make • assault
On the vnguarded Castle of the mind.
Contemne not your condition, for the proofe
Of bare opinion onely: to what end
Reach all these Morall texts?
To place before 'ee
A perfect mirror, wherein you may see
How weary I am of a lingring life,
Who count the best a misery.
Indeed
You haue no little cause; yet none so great
As to distrust a remedy.
That remedy
Must be a winding sheet, a sold of lead,
And some vntrod-on corner in the earth.
Not to detaine your expectation, Princesse,
I haue an humble suit.
Speake, I enioy it.
Vouchsafe then to be my Ex •••• ria,
And take that trouble o • 'ee, to dispose
Such Legacies, as I bequeath impartially •
I haue not much to giue, the paines are easie,
Heauen will reward your piety, and thanke it
When I am dead; for sure I must not liue,
I hope I cannot.
Now beshrew thy sadnesse;
Thou turn'st me too much woman.
Her faire eyes
Melt into passion; Then I haue assurance
Encouraging my boldnesse. — In this paper
My Will was Character'd; which you, with pardon,
Shall now know from mine owne mouth.
Talke on, prethe,
It is a pretty earnest.
I haue left me
But three poore Iewels to bequeath; The first is
My youth; for though I am much old in griefes,
In yeares I am a child.
To whom that?
To Virgin wiues, such as abuse not wedlocke
By freedome of desires, but couet chiefly
The pledges of chast beds, for tyes of loue,
Rather than ranging of their blood • And next
To married maids, such as preferre the number
Of honorable issue in their vertues,
Before the flattery of delights by marriage,
May those be euer young.
A second Iewell
You meane to part with.
'Tis my Fame, I trust,
By scandall yet vn • ouch'd; this I bequeath
To memory, and Times old d • ughter Truth •
If euer my vnhappy name find mention
When I am falne to dust, may it deserue
Be seeming charity without dishonour.
How handsomely thou playst with harmlesse sport
Of meere imagination; speake the last,
I strangely like thy will.
This Iewell, Madam,
Is dearely precious to me; you must vse
The best of your discretion to imploy
This gift as I entend it.
Doe not doubt me.
'Tis long agon • since first I lost my heart,
Long I haue liu'd without it, else for certain •
I should haue 〈…〉
Of it, to great Calantha, 〈…〉
By seruice bound, and by affection vow'd,
I doe bequeath in holiefe rites of loue
Mine onely brother Ithocles.
What saydst thou?
Impute not, heauen-blest Lady, to ambition,
A faith as humbly perfect as the prayers
Of a deuoted suppliant •••• indow it?
Looke on him, Princesse, with an eye of pitty;
How like the ghost of what he 〈◊〉 appe • r'd •
A' moues before you.
Shall I answer here,
Or lend my eare too gr • ffely?
First, his hear •
Shall fall in Cynders, scorch'd by your disdaine,
E're • e will dare, poore man; t • • pe an eye
On these diuine lookes, but with low-be • t thoughts
Accusing such presumption; as for word • ,
A' dares not vtter any but 〈…〉
Yet this lost creature lo • es' •• . — Be a 〈◊〉
In sweetnesse as in blood; giue him his do •• e,
Or raise him vp to comfort.
What new change
Appeares in my behauiour, that th •• 〈◊〉
Tempt my displeasure?
I 〈…〉 the world
To reuell Elizium, and 'tis 〈◊〉
To wish my brother some aduantage her ••
Yet by my best hopes, Ithocles is ignorant
Of this pursuit. But if you please to kill him,
Lend him one angry looke, or one ••• sh w • rd,
And you shall soone conclude how •• rong a power
Your absolute authority h • ld • 〈◊〉
His life and end.
You hau • forgot, P • nthea,
How still I haue a father.
But remember
I am a sister, though to me this ••• ther
Hath beene you know vnki •• e • • most vnkinde!
〈…〉 — Lady,
Your checke lyes in my 〈◊〉 .
Madam, here.
I thinke 'ee sleepe, • ee dro • es; wait on Penth • a
Vnto her lodging. — Ithoc •• s • wrong'd Lady!
My reckonings are made euen, Death or Fate
Can now nor strike too soone, nor force too late. Exeunt.
FOrbeare your Inquisition; curiosity
Is of too subtill, and too searching nature:
In feares of loue too quicke; too slow of credit:
I am not what you doubt me.
Nephew, bethen
As I would wish; — alilis not right, — Good heauen
Confirme your Resolutions for dependance
On worthy end • which may aduance your quiet.
I did the Noble Orgilus much iniury,
But grieu'd Penthea more: I now repent it;
Now, Vncle, now; this Now, is now too late:
So prouident i • 〈◊〉 in sad iss •• ,
That after-wit, like Bankrupts debts, stand tallye •
Without all possibilities of payment:
Sure he's an honest, very honest Gentleman;
A man of singl • meaning.
I beleeue it:
Yet Nephew, 'tis the tongue informes our cares;
Our eyes can neuer pierce into the thoughts,
For they are lodg'd too inward: — but I question
No truth in Orgilus. — The Princesse (Sir)
The Princesse? ha?
With her the Prince of Arg • s.
Great (faire one) grace my hopes with any instance
Of Liuery, from the allowance of your f • uour,
This little sparke.
A Toy •
Loue fea •• on Toyes,
For Cupid is a child, — vouchsafe this bounty •
It cannot beny'd.
You shall not value
(Sweet Cozen) at a price what I count cheape,
So cheape, that let him take it who dares stoope for't,
And giue it at next meeting to a Mistresse,
Shee'le thanke him for't, perhaps. Casts it to Ithocles.
The Ring, Sir, is
The Princesses, I could haue tooke it vp.
Learne manners, prethe. — To the blessed owner
Vpon my knees.
Y'are sawcy.
This is pretty,
I am, belike, a Mistresse. — wondrous pretty:
Let the man keepe his fortune, since he found it;
He's worthy on't. — On Cozen.
Follow Spaniell.
I'le force' • e to a fawning else.
You dare not.
My Lord, you were too forward.
Looke'ee Vncle:
Some such there are whose liberall contents
Swarme without care in euery sort of plenty;
Who, after full repasts, can say them downe
To sleepe; and they sleepe, Vncle: in which silence
Their very dreames present 'em choyce of pleasures:
Pleasures (obserue me Vncle) of rare obiect:
Here heaps of gold, there Increments of honors;
Now change of garments, then the votes of people;
Anon varieties of beauties, courting
In flatteries of the night, exchange of d • lliance,
Yet these are still but dreames: giue me felicity
Of which my senses waking are partakers;
A reall, visible, materiall happinesse:
And then too, when I stagger in expectance
Of the l • ast comfort that can cherish life:
I saw it (Sir) I saw it; for it came
From her owne hand.
The Princesse threw it t'ee:
True, and she said — well I remember what.
Her Cozen Prince would beg it.
Yes, and parted
In anger at your taking on't.
Penthea!
Oh thou hast pleaded with a powerfull language • .
I want a fee to gratifie thy myrit.
But I will doe—
What is't you say?
In anger,
In anger let him part; for could his breath,
Like whirlewinds, tosse such ser • ile slaues as licke
The dust his footsteps print, into a vapour,
It durst not stirre a • aire of mine; It should not,
I'de rend it vp by th' roots first. To be any thing
Calantha smiles on, is to be a blessing
More sacred than a petty-Prince of Argos
Can wish to equall, or in worth or Title.
Containe your selfe, my Lord, Ixion ayming
To embrace Iuno, bosom'd but a cloud,
And begat Centaures : 'tis an vsefull morall,
Ambition hatch'd in clouds of meere opinion,
Proues but in birth a prodigie.
I thanke 'ee;
Yet, with your Licence, I should seeme vncharitable
To gentler Fate, if rellishing the dainties
Of a soules setled peace, I were so feeble
Not to digest it.
He deserues small trust
Who is not priuy Counsellor to himselfe.
Braue me?
Your Excellence mistakes his temper •
For Ithocles in fashion of his mind
Is beautifull, soft, gentle, the cleare mirror
Of absolute perfection.
Was't your modesty
Term'd any of the Prince his seruants Spaniell?
Your Nurse sure taught you other language.
Language.
A gallant Man at armes is here: a Doctor
In feats of Chiualry; blunt, and rough spoken,
Vouchsafing not the fustian of ciuility,
Which rash spirits stile good manners.
Manners.
No more (Illustrious Sir) 'tis marchlesse Ithocles.
You might haue vnderstood who I am.
Yes,
I did — else — but the presence calm'd th' affront;
Y' are Cozen to the Princesse.
To the King too;
A certaine Instrument that lent supportance
To your Collossicke greatnesse: — to that King too
You might haue added.
There is more diuinity
In beauty then in Maiesty.
O fie, fie
This odde youths pride turnes hereticke in loyalty.
Sirrah! low Mushroms neuer riuall Ced • rs.
Come backe: what pittifull dull thing am I
So to be tamely scoulded at? Come backe;
Let him come backe and eccho once againe
That scornefull sound of Mushrome; painted colts,
Like Heralds coats, guilt o're with Crownes and Scepters,
May bait a musled Lion.
Cozen, Coxen,
Thy tongue is not thy friend.
In point of honour
Discretion knowes no bounds. Amelus told me
'Twas all about a little Ring.
A Ring
The Princesse threw away, and I tooke vp:
Admit she threw't to me; what arme of brasse
Can snatch it hence? No, could a' grind the hoope
To powder, a' might sooner reach my heart
Then steale and weare one dust on't. — Orgilus,
I am extreamely wrong'd.
A Ladies fauour
Is not to be so slighted.
Slighted.
Quiet
These vaine vnr • ly passions, which will render ye
Into a madnesse.
Griefes will haue their vent.
Welcome; thou com'st in season (reuereud man)
To powre the balsome of a supplying patience
Into the festering wound of ill-spent fury.
What makes He here?
The hurts are yet but mortall,
Which shortly will proue deadly: To the King,
Armostes, see in safety thou deliuer
This seal'd vp counsaile; bid him with a constancy
Peruse the secrets of the gods: — ô Sparta,
O Lacedemon ! double nam'd, but one
In fate: when Kingdomes reele (marke well my Saw)
Their heads must needs be giddy: tell the King
That henceforth he no more must enquire after
My aged head: Apollo wil • it so;
I am for Delphos.
Not without some conferenc •
With our great master.
Neuer more to see him,
A greater Prince commands me. — Ithocles, When youth is ripe, and Age from time doth part, The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the Broken Heart.
When youth is ripe, and Age from time doth part,
The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the Broken Heart.
What's this, if vnderstood?
List Orgilus,
Remember what I told thee long before,
These teares shall be my witnesse.
'Las good man.
Let craft with curtesie a while conferre,
Reuenge proues its owne Executioner.
Darke sentences are for Apollo's Priests:
I am not Oedipus.
My howre is come;
Cheare vp the King: farewell to all. — O Sparta,
O Lacedemon.
If propheticke fire Exit. Tec ••
Haue warm'd this old mans bosome, we might construe
His words to fatall sense.
Leaue to the powers
Aboue vs, the effects of their decrees;
My burthen lyes within me. Seruile feares
Preuent no great effects. — Diuine Calantha.
The gods be still propitious. — Exeunt, manet Org.
Something oddly
The booke-man prated; yet a' talk'd it weeping • Let craft with curtesie a while conferre, Reuenge proues its owne executioner.
Let craft with curtesie a while conferre,
Reuenge proues its owne executioner.
Conne it againe; for what? It shall not puzzle me;
'Tis dotage of a withered braine. — Penthea
Forbad me not her presence; I may see her,
And gaze my fill: why see her then I may;
When if I faint to speake, I must be silent. Exit Org.
Pray vse your Recreations, all the seruice
I will expect, is quietnesse amongst 'e • :
Take liberty at home, abroad, at all times,
And in your charities appease the gods
Whom I with my distractions haue offended.
Faire blessings on thy heart.
Here's a rare change •
My Lord, to cure the itch, is surely gelded;
The Cuckold, in conceit, hath cast his hornes.
Betake 'ee to your se •• rall occasions,
And wherein I haue heretofore beene faulty,
Let your constructions mildly passe it ouer,
Henceforth I'le study reformation, — more,
I haue not for employment.
O sweet man!
Thou art the very hony-combe of honesty.
The garland of good-will; — Old Lady, hold vp
Thy reuerend snout, and trot behind me softly,
As it becomes a Moile of ancient carriage. Exeunt, manet Bass •
Beasts onely capable of sense, enioy
The benefit of food and ease with thankfulnesse;
Such silly creatures, with a grudging, kicke not
Against the portion Nature hath bestow'd;
But men endow'd with reason, and the vse
Of reason, to distinguish from the chaffe
Of abiect scarscity, the Quintescence,
Soule, and Elixar of the Earths abundance,
The treasures of the Sea, the Ayre, nay heauen
Repining at these glories of creation,
Are verier beast • than beasts; and of those beasts
The worst am I; I, who was made a Monarch
Of what a heart could wish, for a chast wife,
Endeuour'd what in me lay, to pull downe
That Temple built for adoration onely,
And leuel't in the dust of causelesse scandall:
But to redeeme a sacrilege so impious,
Humility shall powre before the deities:
I haue incenst a largenesse of more patience
Then their displeased Altars can require:
No tempests of commotion shall disquiet
The calmes of my composure.
I haue found thee,
Thou patron of more horrors then the bulke
Of manhood, hoop'd about with ribs of Iron,
Can cramb within thy brest: P • nthea (Bassanes)
Curst by thy Iealousies; more, by thy dotag •
Is left a prey to words.
Exercis •
Your trials for addition to my pennance,
I am resolu'd.
Play not with misery
Past cure • some angry Minister of Fate hath
Depos'd the Empresse of her soule, her r •• son,
From its most proper Throne; but what's the miracle
More new, I, I haue seene it, and yet liue.
You may delude my senses, not my iudgement:
'Tis anchor'd into a firme resolution,
Dalliance of Mirth or Wit can ne're vnfixe it.
Practise yet further.
May thy death of loue to her
Damne all thy comforts to a lasting fast
From euery ioy of life: Thou barren rocke,
By thee we haue bee split in ken of harbour.
Sister looke vp, your Ithocles, your brother
Speakes t'ee: why doe you weepe? Deere, turne not from me:
Here is a killing sight: lo, Bassanes,
A lamentable obiect.
Man, dost see't?
Sports are more gamesome; am I yet in merriment?
Why dost not laugh •
Diuine, and best of Ladies,
Please to forget my out-rage? mercy euer
Cannot but lodge vnder a root so excellent:
I haue cast off that cruelty of frenzy
Which once appear'd, Impostors, and then iugled
To cheat my sleeps of rest.
Was I in earnest?
Sure if we were all Sirens, we should sing pittifully;
And 'twere a comely musicke, when in parts
One sung anothers knell: the Turtle sighes
When he hath lost his mate; and yet some say
A' must be dead first: 'tis a fine deceit
To passe away in a dreame: indeed I'ue slept
With mine eyes open a great while. No falshood
Equals a broken faith; there's not a haire
Sticks on my head but like a leaden Plummer
It sinkes me to the graue: I must creepe thither.
The iourny is not long.
But thou, Penthea,
Hast many yeeres, I hope, to number yet
E're thou canst trauell that way.
Let the Swan first
Be wrap'd vp in an euerlasting darknesse,
Before the light of nature, chiefly form'd
For the whole worlds delight, feele an Ecclipse
So vniuersall.
Wisdome (looke 'ee)
Begins to raue: — art thou mad too, antiquity •
Since I was first a wife, I might haue beene
Mother to many pretty pratling Babes:
They would haue smil'd when I smil'd; and, for certaine •
I should haue cry'd when they cry'd; — truly brother,
My father would haue pick'd me out a husband,
And then my little one • had beene no bastards:
But 'tis too late for me to marry now,
I am past child-bearing; 'tis not my fault.
Fall on me, if there be a burning Etna,
And bury me in flames; sweats hot as sulphure,
Boyle through my pores: affliction hath in store
No torture like to this.
Behold a patience •
Lay by thy whyning gr • y dissimulation,
Doe something worth a Chronicle; shew Iustice
Vpon the Author of this mischiefe; dig out
The Iealousies that hatch'd this thraldome first
With thine owne ponyard: euery anticke r • pture
Can roare as thine does.
Orgilus forbeare.
Disturbe him not, it is a talking motion
Prouided for my torment: what a foole am I
To bawdy passion? e're I'le speake a word
I will looke on and burst.
I lou'd you once.
Thou didst, wrong'd creature, in despite of malice;
For it I loue thee euen.
Spare your hand,
Beleeue me, I'le not hurt it.
Paine my heart to
Complaine not though I wring it hard: I'le kisse it;
O 'tis a fine soft palme: harke in thine care,
Like whom doe I looke, pre • he? nay, no whispering.
Goodnesse! we had beene happy: too much happinesse
Will make folke proud they say — but that is he; points at Ithocles.
And yet he paid for't home; alas, his heart
Is crept into the cabinet of the Princesse;
We shall haue points and bridelaces. Remember
When we last gather'd Roses in the garden
I found my wits, but truly you lost yours:
That's He, and still 'tis He.
Poore soule, how idely
Her fancies guide her tongue.
Keepe in vexation,
And breake not into clamour.
She has tutor'd me:
Some powerfull inspiration checks my lazinesse:
Now let me kisse your hand, grieu'd beauty.
Kisse it.
Alacke, alacke, his lips be wondrous cold;
Deare soule, h'as lost his colour: haue 'ee seene
A straying heart? all crannies, euery drop
Of blood is turn'd to an Amethist,
Which married Bachelours hang in their eares.
Peace vsher her into Elizium :
If this be madnesse, madnesse is an Oracle. Exit Org.
Christalla, Philema, when slept my sister,
Her rauings are so wild.
Sir, not these ten dayes.
We watch by her continually; besides,
We cannot any way pray her to eat.
Oh — misery of miseries!
Take comfort,
You may liue well, and dye a good old man:
By yea and nay, an oath not to be broken,
If you had ioyn'd our hands once in the Temple,
'Twas since my father dy'd, for had he liu'd
He would haue don't: I must haue call'd you father:
Oh my wrack'd honour ruin'd by those Tyrants,
A cruell brother, and a desperate dotage!
There is no peace left for a rauish'd wife
Widdow'd by lawlesse marriage; to all memory,
Penthea's, poore Penthea's name is strumpeted:
But since her blood was season'd by the forfeit
Of noble shame, with mixtures of pollution,
Her blood ('tis iust) he henceforth neuer heightned
With tast of sustenance. Star • e, l •• that fulnesse
Whose plurisie hath • euer'd faith and modesty,
Forgiue me: ô I faint.
Be not so wilfull.
Sweet Neece, to worke thine owne destruction.
Nature
Will call her daughter, monster,— what? not eat?
Refuse the onely ordinary meane •
Which are ordain'd for life? be not, my sister,
A murthresse to thy selfe. — Hear'st thou this, Bassanes ?
Fo, I am busie; for I haue not thoughts
Enow to thinke all shall be well anon.
'Tis tumbling in my head there is a mastery
In Art to fatten and keepe smooth the outside;
Yes, and to comfort vp the vitall spirits
Without the helpe of food, fumes or perfumes,
Perfumes or fumes: let her alone, I'le search out
The tricke on't.
Lead me gently; heauens reward ye
Griefes are sure friends; they leaue (without controule)
Nor cure nor comforts for a leprous soule.
I grant t'ee; and will put in practice instantly
What you shall still admire: 'tis wonderfull,
'Tis super singular, not to be match'd:
Yet when I'ue don't, I'ue don't; ye shall all thanke mee.
The sight is full of terror.
On my soule
Lyes such an infinite clogge of massie dulnesse,
As that I haue not sense enough to feele it.
See, Vncle, th'augury thing returnes againe,
Shall's welcome him with Thunder? we are haunted,
And must vse exorcisme to coniure downe
This spirit of maleuolence.
Mildly, Nephew.
I come not, Sir, to chide your late disorder:
Admitting that th' inurement to a roughnesse
In Souldiers of your yeares and fortunes, chiefly
So lately prosperous, hath not yet shooke off
The custome of the warre in houres of leisure:
Nor shall you need excuse, since y • are to render
Account to that faire Excellence, the Princesse,
Who in 〈◊〉 priuate Gallery expect it
From your owne mouth alone: I am a messenger
But to her pleasure.
Excellent Nearchus,
Be Prince still of my seruices, and conquer,
Without the combat of dispute, I honour 'ee.
The King is on a sudden indispos'd,
Physicians are call'd for; 'twere fit, Armostes,
You should be neere him.
Sir, I kisse your hands. Exeunt.
Amelus, I perceiue Calantha's bosome
Is warm'd with other fires then such as can
Take strength from any fuell of the loue
I might addresse to her: young Ithocles,
Or euer I mistake, is Lord ascendant
Of her deuotions; one, to speake him truly,
In euery disposition nobly fashioned,
But can your Highnesse brooke to be so riual'd,
Considering th'inequality of the persons?
I can, Amelus ; for affections iniur'd
By tyrannie, or rigour of compul • ion,
Like Tempest-threatned Trees vnfirmely rooted,
Ne're spring to timely growth: obserue, for instance,
Life-spent Penthea, and vnhappy Orgilus.
How does your grace determine?
To be iealous
In publike, of what priuately I'le further;
And though they shall not know, yet they shall finde it.
Our daughter is not neere?
She is retired, Sir,
Into her gallery.
Where's the Prince our Cozen?
New walk'd into the Groue (my Lord.)
All leave vs,
Except Armostes, and you Cr • tol • n,
We would be priuate.
Health vnto your Maiesty •
What, Tec • i • us is gone?
He is to Delpho • •
And to your Royall hands presents this box.
Vnseale it, good Armostes, therein lyes
The secrets of the Oracle; out with it;
Apollo liue our patron: read, Armostes.
The plot in which the Vine takes root,
Begins to dry, from head to foot,
The stocke soone withering, w • nt of sap
Doth cause to quaile the budding grape:
But from the neighboring Elme, a d • w
Shall drop and feed the Plot 〈◊〉
That is the Oracle, what exposition
Makes the Philosopher?
This brief • one, onely: The plot is Sparta, the 〈◊〉 a Vine the King; The quailing grape his daughter; but the thing Of most importance, not to be reu • al'd, Is a neere Prince, the Elme • the r • st conceal'd.
The plot is Sparta, the 〈◊〉 a Vine the King;
The quailing grape his daughter; but the thing
Of most importance, not to be reu • al'd,
Is a neere Prince, the Elme • the r • st conceal'd.
Enough; although the opening of this Riddle
Be but it selfe a Riddle, yet we constru •
How neere our lab'ring age dr • wes 〈◊〉 rest •
But must Calantha quaile to the young grap •
Vntimely budded! I could mourne for her,
Her tendernesse hath yet deseru'd no • igor
So to be crost by Fate.
You misapply, Sir •
With fauour let me speake it what Apollo
Hath clouded in hid sense: I here co • iectur •
Her marriage with some neighb'ring Prince, the dew
Of which befriending Elme shall euer strengthen
Your Subiects with a Soueraignty of power.
Besides, most gracious Lord, the pith of Oracles
Is to be then digested, when th • euents
Expound their truth, not brought 〈◊〉 to ligh •
As vtter'd; Truth is Child of Time • and herein
I finde no scruple, rather cause of comfort •
With unity of kingdomes.
May it proue so •
For weale of this deare Nation. — where is Ithocles?
Armostes, Crotolon ; when this wither'd Vine
Of my fraile carkasse, on the funerall Pile,
Is fir'd into its ashes, let that young man
Be hedg'd about still with your cares and loues;
Much owe I to his worth, much to his seruice.
Let such as wait come in now.
All attend here.
Deare Sir, King, Father!
O my royall Master!
Cleane not my heart (sweet Twins of my life's solace)
With your fore-iudging feares: there is no Physicke
So cunningly restoratiue to cherish
The fall of Age, or call backe youth and vigor,
As your consents in duty: I will shake off
This languishing disease of time, to quicken
Fresh pleasures in these drooping houres of sadnesse:
Is faire Euphranea married yet to Prophilus?
This morning, gracious Lord.
This very morning •
Which with your Highnesse leaue you may obserue too
Our sister lookes (me thinks) mirthfull and sprightly;
As if her chaster fancy could already
Expound the riddle of her gaine in losing
A trifle; Maids know onely that they know not:
Pish, prethe blush not; 'tis but honest change
Of fashion in the garment, loose for streight,
And so the modest maid is made a wife:
Shrewd businesse, is't not sister?
You are pleasant.
We thanke thee, Orgilus, this mirth becomes thee:
But wherefore sits the Court in such a silence?
A wedding without Reuels is not seemely.
Your into indisposition, Sir, forbade it.
Be it thy charge, Calantha, to set forward
The bridall spo • ts, to which I will • e • resent:
If not, at least consenting • 〈◊〉 owne Ithocles,
I haue done little foe th • e yet.
Y'haue built me
To the full height I stand in.
Now or neuer
May I propose a suit.
Demand and haue it.
Pray Sir giue me this young man, and no further
Account him yours, then he deserues in all things
To be thought worthy mine; I will esteeme him
According to his merit.
Still th'art my daughter,
Still grow'st vpon my heart, giue me thine hand;
Calantha take thine owne; in noble actions
Thou'lt find him firme and absolute: I would no •
Haue parted with thee, Ithocles, to any
But to a mistresse who is all what I am.
A change (great King) most wisht for, cause the sam.—
Th'art mine. — Haue I now kept my word.
Diuinely.
Rich fortuness guard to fauour of a Princesse,
Rocke thee (braue man) in euer crowned plenty;
Y'are minion of the tim • , be thankfull for it:
Ho, here's a swinge in Destiny. — Apparent,
The youth is vp on tiptoe, yet may stumble.
On to your recreations; now conuey me
Vnto my bed-chamber: none on his forehead
Were a distempered looke.
The gods preserue'ee.
Sweet be not from my sight.
My whole felicity.
Shall I be bold my Lord?
Thou canst not, Orgilus ;
Call me thine owne, for Prophilus must henceforth
Be all thy sisters; friendship, though it cease not
In marriage, yet is oft at lesse command
Then when a single freedome can dispose it.
Most right, my most good Lord, my most great Lord,
My gracious Princely Lord, I might adde royall.
Royall, a Subiect royall?
Why not, pray Sir?
The Soueraignty of Kingdomes in their nonage
Stoop'd to desert, not birth: there's as much meri •
In clearenesse of affection, as in puddle
Of generation: you haue conquer'd Loue
Euen in the loueliest; if I greatly erre not,
The sonne of Venus hath bequeath'd his quiuer
To Ithocles his manage, by whose arrowes
Calantha's brest is open'd.
Can't be possible?
I was my selfe a peece of suitor once,
And forward in preferment too; so forward,
That speaking truth, I may without offence (Sir)
Presume to whisper, that my hopes, and (harke 'ee)
My certainty of ma • riage stood assured
With as firme footing (by your leaue) as any's
Now at this very instant — but. —
'Tis granted:
And for a league of priuacy betweene vs,
Read o're my bosome, and pertake a secret;
The Princesse is contracted mine.
Still: why not?
I now applaud her wisdome; when your kingdome
Stands seated in your will secure, and setled,
I dare pronounce you will be a iust Monarch:
Greece must admire, and tremble.
Then the sweetnesse
Of so imparadis'd a comfort, Orgilus,
It is to banquet with the gods.
The glory
Of numerous children, potency of Nobles,
Bent knees, hearts pau'd to tread on.
With a friendshi •
So deare, so fast as thine.
I am vnfitting
For Office, but for seruice.
Wee'll distinguish
Our fortunes meerely in the Title; partners
In all respects else but the bed.
The bed?
Foresend it Ioues owne Iealousie, till lastly
We slip downe in the common earth together;
And there our beds are equall, saue some Monument
To shew this was the King, and this the Subiect.
List, what sad sounds are these? extremely sad ones.
Sure from Penthea's lodgings.
Harke, a voyce too.
Oh no more, no more, too late
Sighes are spent; the burning Tapers
Of a life as chast as Fate,
Pure as are vnwritten papers,
Are bur • t out: no heat, no light
Now remaines 'tis euer night.
Loue is dead, let louers eyes,
Lock'd in endlesse dreames,
Th' extremes of all extremes,
Ope no more, for now Loue dyes,
Now Loue dyes, implying
Loues Martyrs must be euer, euer dying.
Oh my misgiuing heart!
A horrid stilnesse
Succeeds this deathfull ayre, let's know the reason:
Tread softly, there is mystery in mourning. Exeunt.
'Tis done, that on her right hand.
Good, begone.
Soft peace inrich this roome.
How fares the Lady?
Dead.
Dead!
Staru'd.
Staru'd!
Me miserable!
Tell vs
How parted she from life?
She call'd for musicke,
And begg'd some gentle voyce to tune a farewell
To life and griefes: Christalla touch'd the Lute,
I wept the funerall song.
Which scarce was ended,
But her last breath seal'd vp these hollow sounds,
O cruell Ithocles, and iniur'd Orgilus !
So downe she drew her vaile, so dy'd.
So dy'd.
Vp; you are messengers of death, goe from vs;
Here's woe enough to court without a pr • mpter.
Away; and harke ye, till you see vs next,
No sillable that she is dead. —Away, Exeunt Phil. & Chri.
Keepe a smooth brow. — My Lord.
Mine onely sister,
Another is not left me.
Take that chayre,
I'le seat me here in this: betweene vs sits
The obiect of our sorrowes; some few teares
Wee'll part among vs; I perhaps can mixe
One lamentable story to prepare 'em.
There, there, sit there, my Lord.
Yes, as you please.
What meanes this treachery?
Caught, you are caught
Young master: 'tis thy throne of Coronation,
Thou foole of greatnesse: see, I take this vaile off;
Suruey a beauty wither'd by the flames
Of an insulting Phaeton her brother.
Thou mean'st to kill me basely.
I foreknew
The last act of her life, and train'd thee hither
To sacrifice a Tyrant to a Turtle.
You dream't of kingdomes, did 'ee? how to bosome
The delicacies of a youngling Princesse,
How with this nod to grace that subtill Courtier,
How with that frowne to make this Noble tremble,
And so forth; whiles Penthea's grones, and tortures,
Her agonies, her miseries, afflictions,
Ne're toucht vpon your thought; as for my iniuries,
Alas they were beneath your royall pitty,
But yet they liu'd, thou proud man, to confound thee:
Behold thy fate, this steele.
Strike home; a courage
As keene as thy reuenge shall giue it welcome:
But prethe faint not; if the wound close vp,
Tent it with double force, and search it deeply.
Thou look'st that I should whine, and beg compassion,
As loath to leaue the vainnesse of my glories;
A statelier resolution armes my confidence,
To cozen thee of honour; neither could I,
With equall tryall of vnequall fortune,
By hazard of a duell, 'twere a brauery
Too mighty for a slaue intending murther:
On to the Execution, and inherit
A conflict with thy horrors.
By Apollo,
Thou talk'st a goodly language; for r • quitall,
I will report thee to thy mistresse richly:
And take this peace along; some few short minutes
Determin'd, my resolues shall quickly follow
Thy wrathfull ghost; then if we tug for mastery,
Pentheas sacred eyes shall lend new courage.
Giue me thy hand, be healthfull in thy parting
From lost mortality: thus, thus, I free it. kils him.
Yet, yet, I scorne to shrinke.
Keepe vp thy spirit:
I will be gentle euen in blood; to linger
Paine, which I striue to cure, were to be cruell.
Nimble in vengeance I forgiue thee; follow
Safety, with best successe ô may it prosper!
Penthea, by thy side thy brother bleeds:
The earnest of his wrongs to thy forc'd faith,
Thoughts of ambition, or delitious banquet,
With beauty, youth, and loue, together perish
In my last breath, which on the sacred Altar
Of a long look'd for peace-now-moues-to heauen. moritur.
Farewell, faire spring of manhood; henceforth welcome
Best expectation of a noble suffrance:
I'le locke the bodies safe, till what must follow
Shall be approu'd • — Sweet Twins shine stars for euer.
In vaine they build their hopes, whose life is shame,
No monument l • sts but a happy Name. Exit Orgilus.
AThens, to Athens I haue sent, the Nursery
Of Greec • for lea • ning, and the Fount of knowledge:
For here in Sparta there's not left amongst vs
One wise man to direct, we're all turn'd madcaps:
'Tis said, Apollo is the god of herbs;
Then certainly he knowes the vertue of 'em:
To Delphos I haue sent to; if there can be
A helpe for nature, we are sure yet.
Honour
Attend thy counsels euer.
I beseech thee
With all my heart let me goe from thee quietly,
I will not ought to doe with thee of all men.
The doublers of a Hare, or, in a morning,
Salutes from a splay-footed witch, to drop
Three drops of blood at th' nose iust, and no more,
Croaking of Rauens, or the screech of Owles,
Are not so boading mischiefe as thy crossing
My priuate meditations: shun me, prethe;
And if I cannot loue thee hartily,
I'le loue thee as well as I can.
Noble Bassanes
Mistake me not.
Phew, then we shall be troubled;
Thou wert ordain'd my plague, heauen make me thankfull,
And giue me patience too, heauen I beseech thee.
Accept a league of amity; for henceforth
I vow by my best Genius, in a sillable,
Neuer to speake vexation; I will study
Seruice and friendship with a zealous sorrow
For my past inciuility towards 'ee.
Heydey! good words, good words, I must beleeue 'em,
And be a Coxcombe for my labor.
Vse not
So hard a Language; your misdoubt is causelesse
For instance; if you promise to put on
A constancy of patience, such a patience
As Chronicle, or history ne're mentioned,
As followes not example, but shall stand
A wonder, and a Theame for imitation,
The first, the Index pointing to a second,
I will acquaint'ee with an vnmatch'd secret,
Whose knowledge to your griefes shall set a period.
Thou canst not ( Orgilus ) 'tis in the pow • r
Of the gods onely; yet for satisfaction,
Because I note an earnest in thine vtterance,
Vnforc'd, and naturally free, be resolute
The Virgin Bayes shall not withstand the lightning
With a more carelesse danger, than my constancy
The full of thy relation: could it moue
Distraction in a senselesse marble statue,
It should finde me a rocke: I doe expect now
Some truth of vnheard moment.
To your patience
You must adde priuacie, as strong in silence
As mysteries look'd vp in Ioues owne bosome.
A skull hid in the earth a treble age,
Shall sooner prate.
Lastly, to such direction
As the seuerity of a glorious Action
Deserues to lead your wisdome and your iudgement,
You ought to yeeld obedience.
With assurance
Of will and thankfulnesse.
With manly courage
Please then to follow me.
Where e're, I feare not.
We misse our seruant Ithocles and Orgilus,
On whom attend they?
My sonne, gracious Princesse,
Whisper'd some new deuice, to which these; Reuels
Should be but vsher: wherein I conceiue
Lord Ithocles and he himselfe are Actors.
A faire excuse for absence: as for Bassanes.
Delights to him are troublesome; Armostes
Is with the King.
He is.
On to the dance:
Deare Cozen, hand you the Bride, the Bridegroome must be
Intrusted to my Courtship: be not ica • o •••
Euphranea, I shall scarcely proue a temptresse:
Fall to our dance.
The King your father's dead. — in Calantha's eare •
To the other change.
Is't possible?
O Madam!
Penthea, poore Penthea's staru'd.
Beshrew thee,
Lead to the next.
Amazement duls my senses.
Braue Ithocles is murther'd, murther'd cruelly.
How dull this musicke sounds? strike vp more sprightly?
Our footings are not actiue like our heart
Which treads the nimbler measure.
I am thunder-strooke.
So, let us breath a while: hath not this motion
Rais'd fresher colour on your cheeks?
Sweet Princesse.
A perfect purity of blood enamels
The beauty of your white.
We all looke cheerfully:
And Cozen, 'tis, me thinks, a rare presumption
In any, who prefe • s our lawfull pleasures
Before their owne sowre censure, to interrupt
The custome of this Ceremony bluntly.
None dares, Lady.
Yes, yes; some hollow voyce deliuer'd to me
How that the King was dead.
The King is dead:
That fatall newes was mine; for in mine armes
He breath'd his last, and with his Crowne bequeath'd 'ee
Your mothers wedding Ring, which here I tender.
Most strange!
Peace crown his ashes: we are queen then.
Long li • e Calan • ha, Sparta's Soueraigne Queene.
Long liue the Queene.
What whispered Bass •••• ?
That my Penthea, miserable soule,
Was starn'd to death.
Shee's happy; she hath finish'd
A long and painefull progresse.— A third murmure
Pierc'd mine vnwilling eares.
That Ithocles
Was murther'd; rather butcher'd, had not brauery
Of an vndaunted spirit, conquering terror,
Proclaim'd his last Act triumph ouer mine.
How? murther'd?
By whose hand?
By mine; this weapon
Was instrument to my reuenge: the reasons
Are iust and knowne: quit him of these, and then
Neuer liu'd Gentleman of greater merit,
Hope, or abiliment to steere a kingdome.
Fye Orgilus.
Fye brother.
You haue done it.
How it was done let him report, the forfeit
Of whose alleageance to our lawes doth couet
Rigour of Iustice; but that done it is,
Mine eyes haue beene an euidence of credit
Too sure to be conuinc'd: Armostes, rent not
Thine Arteries with hearing the bare circumstances
Of these calamities: thou'st lost a Nephew,
A Neece, and I a wife: continue man still,
Make me the patterne of digesting euils,
Who can out-liue my mighty ones, not shrinking
At such a pressure as would sinke a soule
Into what's most of death, the worst of horrors:
But I haue seal'd a couenant with sadnesse,
And enter'd into bonds without condition
To stand these tempests calmely; marke m • , Nobles,
I doe not shed a teare, not for Penth • a :
Excellent misery!
We begin our reigne
With a first act of Iustice: thy confession,
Vnhappy Orgilus, doomes thee a sentence;
But yet thy fathers, or thy sisters presence
Shall be excus'd: giue, Crotolon, a blessing
To thy lost sonne • Euphranea, take a farewell,
And both be gone.
Confirme thee, noble sorrow,
In worthy resolution.
Could my teares speake,
My griefes were sleight.
All gooddesse dwell amongst yee •
Enioy my sister, Prophilus ; my vengeance
Aym'd neuer at thy preiudice.
Now withdraw:
Bloody relator of thy staines in blood;
For that thou hast reported him whose fortunes
And life by thee are both at once snatch'd from him,
With honourable mention; make thy choyce
Of what death likes thee best, there's all our bounty.
But to excuse delayes, let me (deare Cozen)
Intreat you and these Lords see execution
Instant before 'ee part.
Your will commands vs.
One suit, iust Queene, my last; vouchsafe your clemency
That by no common hand I be diuided
From this my humble frailty.
To their wisdomes
Who are to be spectators of thine end,
I make the reference: those that are dead,
Are dead; had they not now dy'd, of necessity
They must haue payd the debt they ow'd to nature,
One time or other. — Vse dispatch, my Lords,
Wee'll suddenly prepare our Coronation.
'Tis strange, these Tragedies should neuer touch on
Her female pitty.
She has a masculine spirit:
And wherefore should I pule, and like a girle,
Put finger in the eye: let's be all toughnesse,
Without distinction betwixt sex and sex.
Now Orgilus thy choyce.
To bleed to death.
The Executioner.
My selfe, no Surgeon.
I am well skill'd in letting blood: bind fast
This arme, that so the pipes may from their conduits
Conuey a full streame: here's a skilfull Instrument:
Onely I am a beggar to some charity
To speed me in this Execution,
By lending th'other pricke to th' tother arme,
When this is bubling life ou • .
I am for 'ee.
It most concernes my art, my care, my credit;
Quicke, fillet both this armes.
Gramercy friendship •
Such curtesies are reall, which flow cheerefully
Without an expection of requitall.
Reach me a staffe in this hand: if a pronenesse,
Or custome in my nature, from my cradle,
Had beene inclin'd to fierce and eager bloodshed;
A coward guilt, hid in a coward quaking,
Would haue betray'd fame to ignoble flight,
And vagabond pursuit of dreadfull safety:
But looke vpon my steddinesse, and scorne not
The sicknesse of my fortune, which since Bassanes
Was husband to Penthea, had laine bed-rid:
We trifle time in words: thus I shew cunning
In opening of a veine too full, too liuely.
Desperate courage.
Honourable infan • y.
I tremble at the sight.
Would I were loose.
It sparkles like a lusty wine new broacht;
The vessell must be sound from which it issues;
Graspe hard this other sticke • I'le be as nimble.
But prethe looke not pale; haue at 'ee stretch out
Thine arme with vigor, and vnshooke vertue.
Good; ô I enuy not • Riuall fit • ed
To conquer in extremities; this pastime
Appeares maiesticall: some high tun'd poem
Hereafter shall deliuer to posterity
The writers glory, and his subiects triumph:
How is't man, droope not yet.
I feele no palsies:
On a paire royall doe I wait in death;
My Soueraigne, as his Liegeman; on my Mistresse,
As a deuoted seruant; and on Ithocles,
As if no braue, yet no vnworthy enemy:
Nor did I vse an engine to intrap
His life, out of a slauish feare to combate
Youth, strength, or cunning, but for that I durst not
Ingage the goodnesse of a cause on fortune,
By which his name might haue out-fac'd my vengeance:
〈◊〉 Tecnicus, inspir'd with Phaebus fire,
I call to mind thy Augury, 'twas perfect;
Reuenge proues its owne Executioner •
When feeble man is bending to his mother,
The dust 'a was first fram'd on, thus he totters.
Life's fountaine is dry'd vp.
So falls the Standards
Of my prerogatiue in being a creature:
A mist hangs o're mine eyes; the Sun's bright splendor
Is clouded in an euerlasting shadow:
Welcome thou yce that sit'st about my heart,
No heat can euer thaw thee.
Speech hath left him. dyes.
A' has shooke hands with time: his funerall vrne
Shall be my charge: remoue the bloodlesse bodie;
The Coronation must require attendance:
That past, my few dayes can be but one mourning. Exeunt.
Our Orisons are heard, the gods are mercifull:
Now tell me, you whose loyalties payes tribute
To vs your lawfull Soueraigne, how vnskilfull
Your duties or obedience is, to render
Subiection to the Scepter of a Virgin,
Who haue beene euer fortunate in Princes
Of masculine and stirring composition?
A woman has enough to gouerne wisely
Her owne demeanours, passions, and diuisions.
A Nation warlike and inu • 'd to practice
Of policy and labour, cannot brooke
A feminate authority: we therefore
Command your counsaile, how you may aduise vs
In choosing of a husband whose abilities
Can better guide this kingdome.
Royall Lady,
Your law is in your will.
We haue seene tokens
Of constancy too lately to mistrust it.
Yet if your highnesse se • tle on a choice
By your owne iudgement both allow'd and lik'd of,
Sparta may grow in power, and proceed
To an increasing height.
Hold you the same minde.
Alas great mistris, reason is so clouded
With the thicke darkenesse of my infinites woes
That I forecast, nor dangers, hopes, or safety:
Give me some corner of the world to weare out
The remnant of the minutes I must number,
Where I may heare no sounds, but sad complaints
Of Virgins who have lost contracted partners;
Of husbands howling that their wives were ravisht
By some untimely fate; of friends divided
By churlish opposition, or of fathers
Weeping upon their childrens slaughtered carcasses;
Or daughters groaning ore their fathers hearses,
And I can dwell there • and with these keepe consort
As musicall a • their •• what can you looke •• r
From an old foolish peevish doting man,
But crasinesse of age?
Cozen of Argos.
Madam.
Were I presently
To choose you for my Lord, Ile open freely
What articles I would propose to treat on
Before our marriage.
Name them vertuous Lady.
I would presume you would retaine the royalty
Of Sparta in her owne bounds: then in Argos
Armostes might be Viceroy; in Mess • ne
Might Crotolon beare sway, and Bassanes —
I, Queene? alas! what I?
Be Sparta's Marshall:
The multitudes of high imployments could not
But set a peace to priuate griefes: these Gentlemen,
Gron • as and Lemophil, with worthy pensions
Should wait vpon your person in your Chamber:
I would bestow Christall • on Amelus,
Shee'll proue a constant wife, and Phil • m.
Should into Vesta's Temple.
This is a Testament,
It sounds not like conditions on a marriage.
All this should be perform'd,
Lastly, for Prophilus •
He should be (Cozen) solemnly inuested
In all those honors, titles, and preferments
Which his deare friend, and my neglected husband
Too short a time enioy'd.
I am vnworthy
To liue in your remembrance.
Excellent Lady!
Madam, what meanes that word neglected husband?
Forgiue me: now I turne to thee thou shadow
Of my contracted Lord: beare witnesse all,
I put my mother wedding Ring vpon
His finger, 'twas my fathers last bequest:
Thus I new marry him whose wife I am;
Death shall not separate vs: ô my Lords,
I but deceiu'd your eyes with Anticke gesture,
When one newes straight came hudling on another,
Of death, and death, and death, still I danc'd forward,
But it strooke home, and here, and in an instant,
Be such meere women, who with shreeks and out-crie •
Can vow a present end to all their sorrowes,
Yet liue to vow new pleasures, and out-liue them:
They are the silent griefes which cut the hart-strings;
Let me dye smiling.
'Tis a truth too ominous.
One kisse on these cold lips, my last; cracke, cr • cke.
Argos now's Sparta 's King: command the voyces
Which wait at th' Altar, now to sing the song
I fitted for my end.
Sirs, the • ong •
All. Glories, pleasures, pomps, deligh • s, and ease,
Can but please
outward senses, when the mind
Is not vntroubled, or by peace refin'd.
1 Crownes may flourish and decay,
Beauties shine, but fade away.
2. Youth may reuell, yet it must
Lye downe in a bed of dust:
3. Earthly honors flow and wast,
Time alone doth change and last.
All. Sorrowes mingled with contents, prepare
Rest for care;
Loue onely reignes in death: though Art
Can find no comfort for a broken heart.
Looke to the Queene.
Her heart is 〈…〉
O royall ma • d, would thou hadst mis • this part:
Yet 'twas a braue one: I must weepe to see
Her smile in death.
Wise Tecnicus, thus said • e • When youth is ripe, and age from time doth part, The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the broken hearts
When youth is ripe, and age from time doth part,
The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the broken hearts
'Tis here fulfill'd.
I am your King.
Long liue
Nearchus King of Sparta.
Her last will
Shall neuer be digrest from; wait in order
Vpon these faithfull louers as becomes vs.
The Counsels of the gods are neuer knowne,
Till men can call th' effects of them their owne •