THE LADIES TRIALL. ACTED By both their Majeſties Servants at the private houſe in DRVRY LANE.
FIDE HONOR
LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Shephard, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Chancery-lane at the ſigne of the Bible, between Sarjants Inne and Fleet-ſtreet, neare the Kings-head Taverne. 1639.
T HE inequalitie of retribution turnes to a pitty, when there is not ability ſufficient for acknowledge ment. Your equall reſpects may yet admit the readineſſe of Ende vour, though the very hazard in it, betray my Defect. I have enjoyed freely ac quaintance, with the ſweetneſſe of your diſ poſitions; and can juſtly account, from the Nobleneſſe of them, an evident diſtinction be twixt Friendſhip and Friends. The latter (ac cording to the practice of complement) are uſu ally met with; and often without Search: The other, many have ſearcht for, I have found. For which, though I partake a benefite of the for tune; yet to you (moſt equall Paire) muſt remain the Honour of that Bounty. In preſenting this Iſſue of ſome leſſe ſerious houres to your tuition, I appeale from the ſeveritic of cenſure, to the mercy of your Iudgements: and ſhall rate It at a higher value, than when It was mine own, if you onely allow It the favour of Adoption. Thus, as your happines in the fruition of each others love, proceeds to a conſtancie: ſo the truth of mine, ſhal appeare leſſe un-ſhaken, as you ſhall pleaſe to con tinue in your good opinions.
LAnguage and matter, with a fit of mirth,
That ſharply ſavours more of aire than earth,
Like Midwives, bring a Play to timely birth.
But wheres now ſuch a one? in which theſe three,
Are hanſonely contriv'd? or if they bee,
Are underſtood by all who heare to ſee.
Wit, wit's the word in faſhion, that alone
Cryes up the Poet, which though neatly ſhowne,
Is rather cenſur'd often-times than knowne.
He who will venture on a jeſt, that can
Raile on anothers paine, or idlely ſcan
Affaires of ſtate, oh hee's the onely man.
A goodly approbation, which muſt bring
Fame with contempt, by ſuch a deadly ſting,
The Muſes chatter, who were wont to ſing.
Your ſavours in what we preſent to day,
Our fearleſſe Author boldly bids me ſay,
He tenders you no Satyr, but a play.
In which, if ſo he have not hit all right,
For wit, words, mirth, and matter as he might,
A' wiſhes yet a' had for your delight.
A Ccompliſhed man of faſhion.
The times wonder.
Gallant of gallants Genoas Piero.
Italies darling, Europes joy, and ſo forth,
The neweſt newes, un-vampt,
I am no foot-poaſt,
No pedlar of Aviſo's, no monopoliſt
Of forged Corantos, monger of Gazets.
Monger of courtezans, fine Futelli,
In certaine kinde a merchant of the ſtaple
For wares of uſe and trade, a taker up,
Rather indeede a knocker downe, the word
Will carry either ſence but in pure earneſt,
How trowles the common noyſc?
Auria who lately
Wedded and bedded to the ſame Spinella,
Tyred with the enjoyments of delights, is haſting to 〈◊〉 the Tur kiſh pirats, in the ſervice of the great Duke of Florence.
Does not carry
His pretty thing along.
Leaves her to buffet
Land pirats here at home.
Thats thou and I,
Futelli (ſirrah) and Piero —blockhead
To runne from ſuch an arme full of pleaſures
For gaining, what? a bloudy noſe of honour,
Moſt ſottiſh and abominable.
wicked
Shamefull and cowardlie I will maintaine.
Is all my ſigniors hoſpitality
Huge banquetings deepe revells coſtly trapings
Shrunke to a c • bbin, and a ſingle welcome
To beverage and bisket,
Hold thy peace man.
It makes for us—he comes, lets part demurely.
Wee wiſh thee (honourd Auria) life and ſafety,
Returne crownd with a victory, whoſe wreath,
Of triumph may advance thy countries glory,
Worthy your name and Anceſtors.
My Lord,
I ſhall not live to thrive in any action,
Deſerving memory when I forget
Adurnis love and tavour.
I preſent ye •
My ſervice for a farewell.
Let few words
Excuſe all arts of complement.
For my owne part,
Kill or be kill'd, for theres the ſhort and long on't.
Call me your ſhadowes hinch-boy.
Gentlemen,
My buſineſſe urging on a preſent haſt,
E • forceth ſhort replie.
Wee dare not hinder
Your reſolution wingd with thoughts ſo conſtant.
All happineſſe.
PHVT. Contents.
So leave the wintred people of the North,
The minutes of their ſummer, when the Sunne
Departing leaves them in Cold roabes of Ice, Enter Trelca tio, Spinella, & Caſtanna.
As I leave Genoa,—now appeares the object
Of my apprentic'd hart, thou bringſt Spinella
A welcome in a farewell, ſoules and bodies
Are ſeverd for a time, a ſpan of time;
To joyne againe without all ſeparation,
In a confirmed unitie for ever.
Such will our next embraces be for life;
And then to take the wracke of our diviſions,
Will ſweeten the remembrance of paſt dangers,
Will fallen love in perpetuity,
Will force our ſl • epes to ſteale upon our ſtories ▪
Theſe daies muſt come, and ſhal without a cloud
Or • ight of feare, or envie: to your charge,
(Trelcatio our good unkle) and the comfort
Of my Spinella's ſiſter, faire Caſtanna,
I doe intruſt this treaſure.
I dare promiſe,
My husbanding that truſt with truth and care.
My ſiſer ſhall to me ſtand an example,
Of powring free devotions for your ſafety.
Gentle Caſtanna, thou art a branch of goodneſſe,
Growne on the ſelfe ſame ſtocke with my Spinella.
But why my deere, haſt thou lockd up thy ſpeech in ſo much ſilent ſadneſſe, oh at parting!
Belike one private whiſper muſt bee ſighd,
Vncle the beſt of peace enrich your familie,
I take my leave.
Bleſſings and health preſerve yee.
Nay nay Caſtanna, you may hear our counſels.
A while, you are deſigad your ſiſters husband,
Give me thy hand Spinella, you did promiſe,
To ſend me from you with more cheerefull lookes,
Without a grudge or teare, deed love you did.
What friend have I left in your abſence?
Many thy vertues are ſuch friends, they cannot faile thee,
Faith, purity of thoughts and ſuch a meekeneſſe,
As would force ſcandall to a bluſh.
Admit Sir,
The patent of your life ſhould be calld in,
How am I left then to account with griefes;
Mor • ſlav'd to pity then a broken heart?
Auria ! ſoule of my comforts, I let fall
No eye on breach of fortu •• , I contemne
No entertainment to divided hopes;
I urge no preſſures by the ſcorne of change;
And yet my Auria, when I but conceave
How eaſie tis (without impoſſibilitie)
Never to ſee thee more, forgive me then,
If I conclude I may be miſerable,
Moſt miſerable.
And ſuch concluſion ſiſter
Argues effects of a diſtruſt more voluntarie then cauſe by likely hood.
T is truth Caſtanna.
I grant it truth, yet Auria I am a woman;
And therefore apt to feare, to ſhew my dutie
And not take heart from you, Ile walke from yee,
At your command, and not as much as trouble
Your thought with one poore looking backe.
I thanke thee,
My worthy wife! before we kiſſe, receave
This caution from thine Auria, firſt Caſtanna
Let us bid farewell.
Speake (good) ſpeake ▪
the ſteps
Young Ladies tread left to their own diſcretion,
How ever wiſely printed are obſerved
And conſtrued as the lookers on preſume,
Point out thy waies then in ſuch even pather,
As thine owne iealouſies from others tongues
May not intrude a guilt, tho undeſerved.
Admit of viſits as of Phyſicke forc'd
Not to procure health, but for ſafe prevention
Againſt a growing ſickeneſſe in thy uſe
Of time and of diſcourſe be found ſo thriſty,
As no remembrance may impeach thy reſt,
Appeare not in a faſhion that can prompt
The gazers eye, or holla to report;
Some widdowed neglect of hand, ſome value
In recreations be both wiſe, and free,
Live ſtill at home, home to thy ſelfe how-ere
Enricht with noble company, remember
A womans vertue in her lifetime, writes
The Epitaph all covet on their tombes,
In ſhort I know thou never wilt forget
Whoſe wife thou art, nor how upon thy lippes,
Thy husband at his parting ſtald this kiſſe.
No more.
Deere heaven I goe ſiſter, goe.
Done bravely, Enter Aure lio.
And like the choice of glory to know mine,
One of earths beſt I have forgone,—ſee, ſee,
Yet in another I am rich; a friend,
A perfect one, Aurelio.
Had I been,
No ſtranger to your boſome Sir, erenow
You might have ſorted me in your reſolves,
Companion of your fortunes.
So the wrongs
I ſhould have ventur'd on againſt thy fate
Muſt have deny'd all pardon, not to hold
Diſpute with reputations, why before
This preſent inſtant I conceald the ſtealth
Of my adventures from the Counſels, know
My wants doe drive me hence.
Wants, ſo you ſayd,
And 'twas not friendly ſpoken,
Heare me further.
Auria take heed, the covert of a folly
Willing to range; be not without excuſe
Diſcoverd in the coynage of untruths.
I uſe no harder language, thou art neare
Already on a ſhip-wrack in forſaking
The holy land of friendſhip in forſaking
To talke your wants. Fie.
By that ſacred thing
Laſt iſſu'd from the Temple where it dwelt,
I mean our friendſhip, I am ſunke ſo low
In my eſtate, that bids me live in Genoa
But ſix moneths longer, I ſurvive the remnant
Of all my ſtore.
Vmh.
In my Countrey, friend
Where I have ſided my ſuperiour friend
Swayd oppoſition, friend, friend here to fall
Subject to ſcorne, or rarely found compaſion,
W • re more than man that hath a ſoule could beare,
A ſoule not ſtoop'd to ſervitude.
Your ſhew,
Nor certaintie, nor weake aſſurance yet
Of reparation in this courſe: in caſe
Command be proffered.
He who cannot merit
Preferment by employments, let him bare
His throat unto the Turkiſh cruelty,
Or dye or live a ſlave without redemption.
For that ſo, but you have a wife, a young,
A faire wife; ſhe, though free could never claime
Right in proſperitie, was never tempted
By triall of extreames, to youth and beauty,
Bayts for diſhonour, and a periſht fame.
Shew me the man that lives, and ſo my face
Dares ſpeake, ſcarce thinke, ſuch tyranny againſt
Spinellas conſtancie, except Aurelio
He is my friend.
There lives not then a friend
Dares love you like Aurelio, that Aurelio,
Who 〈◊〉 and early; often ſayd and truly,
Your marriage with Spinella would entangle
As much th'opinion due to your diſcretion,
As your eſtate, it hath done ſo to both.
I finde it hath.
He who preſcribes no law,
No limits of condition to the objects
Of his affection; but will meerly wed
A face becauſe tis round, or limb'd by nature
In pureſt red and white, or at the beſt,
For that his miſtreſſe owes an excellence
Of qualities, knowes when and how to ſpeake,
Where to keepe ſilence, with fit reaſons why,
Whoſe vertues are her onely dowre, elſe
In either kinde, ought of himſelfe to maſter
Such fortunes as as adde fuell to their loves
For otherwiſe:—but herein I am idle,
Have foold to little purpoſe.
She's my wife.
And being ſo, it is not manly done
To leave her to the triall of her wits,
Her modeſtie, her innocence, her vowes.
This is the way that poynts her out an art
Of wanton life.
Sir, ſayd yee?
You forme reaſons,
Iuſt ones, for your abandoning the ſtormes
Which threaten your owne ruine; but propoſe
No ſhelter for her honour; what my tongue
Hath utterd, Auria, is but honeſt doubt,
And you are wiſe enough in the conſtruction.
Neceſſitie muſt arme my confidence,
Which if I live to triumph over friend,
And ere come back in plentie, I pronounce
Aurelio heire of what I can bequeath.
Some fit deduction for a worthy widow,
Allowd with caution, ſhe be like to prove ſo.
Who? I your heire? your wife being yet ſo young,
In every probability ſo forward
To make you a father? leave ſuch thoughts.
Believe it,
Without replies Aurelio: keepe this note,
A warrant for receiving from 〈◊〉
Two hundred Ducats; as you finde occaſion
Diſpoſe them in my abſence to Spinella.
I would not truſt her uncle ▪ hee good man,
Is at an ebbe himſelfe, another hundred
I left with her, a fourth I carry with me,
Am I not poore, Aurelio, now? exchange
Of more debates between us, would undoe
My reſolution: Walke a little prithee,
Friends we are, and will embrace: but let's not ſpeake
Another word.
Ile follow you to your horſe.
With her owne hand.
She never us'd my Lord,
A ſecond meanes, but kiſt the letter firſt,
Orelookt the ſuperſcription: then let fall
Some amorous drops, kiſt it againe, talkt to it
Twentie times over, ſet it to her mouth,
Then gave it me, then ſnatch'd it backe againe,
Then cryd, oh my poore heart, and in an inſtant
Commend my truth and ſecreſie, ſuch medly
Of paſſion yet, I never ſaw in woman.
In woman? th'art deceav'd; but that we both
Had mothers, I could ſay how women are,
In their owne natures, modells of meere change:
Of change of what is naught, to what is worſe,
She fed ye liberally.
Twenty ducates
She forcd on me, vowd by the pretious love
She bore the beſt of men, (I uſe my lord)
Her very words the miracle of men,
Malfato, (then ſhe ſigh'd) this mite of gold
Was only entrance to a farther bounty,
Tis meant (my lord) be like preſſe mony.
Divell! how durſt ſhe tempt thee, Futelli, knowing
Thy love to me?
There lies (my lord) her cunning,
Rather her craft: firſt ſhe began what pitty
It was, that men ſhould differ in eſtates,
Without proportion ſome ſo ſtrangely rich,
Others ſo miſerable poore; and yet,
Quoth ſhe, ſince tis very deed unfit
All ſhould be equalls; ſo I muſt confeſſe
It were good juſtice that the propereſt men
Should be prefer'd to fortune, ſuch as nature
Had mark't with faire abilities of which
Genoa, for ought I know, hath wondrous few
Not two to boaſt of.
Here began her itch.
I anſwerd, ſhe was happy then, whoſe choice
In you, my lord, was ſingular.
Well urgd.
She ſmil'd, and ſaid, it might be ſo, and yet
There ſtopt: then I cloz'd with her, and concluded
The title of a lord was not enough,
For abſolute perfection, I had ſeene
Perſons of meaner quality, much more
Exact in faire indowments; but your Lordſhip
Will pardon me, I hope.
And love thee for it.
Phew: let that paſſe (quoth ſhe) and now wee prattle
Of handſome gentlemen, in my opinion,
Malfato is a very prety fellow,
Is he not, pray Sir, I had then the truth
Of what I rov'd a ••• nd with more then praiſe,
Approv'd her judgement in ſo high a ſtraine,
Without compariſon (my honourd Lord)
That ſoone we • both concluded of the man,
The match and buſineſſe.
For delivering
A letter to Malfato.
Whereto I
No ſooner had conſented, with proteſts,
(I did proteſt my Lord) of ſecreſie,
And ſervice, but ſhe kiſt me (as I live)
Of her owne free accord—(I truſt your lordſhip
Conceaves not me amiſſe) pray rip the ſeale
(My lord) youle finde ſweet ſtuffe, I dare believe,
Preſent to the moſt accompliſht
Of men, Malfato with this
Love a ſervice.
Kind Superſcription, prithee finde him out,
Deliver it with complement, obſerve
How ceremoniouſly he does receive it.
will not your lordſhip peruſe the contents?
enough I know too much be juſt, and cunning
A wanton Miſtreſſe is a common ſewer
Much never project labors in my braine—
Y • ur friend heres now the Gemini of wit
What od conceit is next on foot, ſome caſt Enter Piero.
Of neate invention, ha ſire.
Very fine,
I doe proteſt my lord.
Your lordſhips eare ſhall ſhare ith' plot.
As how?
You know my lord
Young Amoretta, old Trelcatio's daughter
An honeſt man, but poore.
And my good lord,
He that is honeſt, muſt be poore, my lord,
It is a common rule.
Well Amoretta,
Pray one at once my knowledge is not much,
Of her inſtruct me.
Speake Futelli.
Spare me.
Piero has the tongue more pregnant.
Fie play on your creature.
Shall be yours.
Nay good.
Well keep your mirth, my dainty honies agree
Some two daies hence, till when—
By any meanes,
Partake the ſport, my lord, this thing of youth.
Hanſome enough, good face, quicke eye, well bred.
Is yet poſſeſt ſo ſtrangely.
With an humor of thinking, ſhe deſerves—
A Duke, a Count.
At leaſt a Viſcount, for her husband that—
She ſcornes all mention of a match beneath
One of the foreſaid nobles; will not ride
In a caroach without eight horſes.
Six, ſhe may be drawn to fower—
Are for the power ▪
But for two horſes in a coach—
She ſaies,
Th'are not for creatures of heavens making fitter—
Fitter for litters to convey hounds in,
Then people chriſtian yet herſelfe—
Herſelfe walkes evermore a foot, and knowes not whether
A Coach dothtrot or amble.
But by heare-ſay.
Stop gentlemen, you run a gallopboth ▪
Are out of breath ſure, tis a kinde of complement
Scarce entred to the times, but certainly
You coyne a humour, let me underſtand
Deliberately your fancie.
In plaine troath,
My Lord, the ſhe whom we deſcribe is ſuch,
And lives here, here in Genoa, this Citie,
This very citie, now, the very now.
Trelcatios daughter.
Has refuſed ſuiters
Of worthy ranke, ſubſtantiall and free parts ▪
Onely for that they are not Dukes, or Counts,
Yet ſhe herſelfe, wi h all her fathers ſtore,
Can hardly weigh above foure hundred Ducates ▪
Now your deſigne for ſport.
Without prevention,
Guzman the Spaniard late caſheerd, moſt gravely
Obſerves the full punctilios of his nation,
And him have we beleagred to accoſt
This ſhee-peece, under a pretence of being
Grandee of Spain, and couſin to twelve Princes.
For rivall unto whom we have enrag'd
Fulgoſo, the rich cox-combe lately ſtarted
A gentleman out of a Su • lers hut,
In the late Flemiſh warres, we have reſolvd him
He is deſcended from Pantagruel,
Of famous memory by the fathers ſide,
And by the mother from Dame Fuſti-Bunga,
Who troubled long time with a ſtrangury,
Vented at laſt ſalt-water ſo abundantly,
As drownd the land twixt Sirixia and V • re,
Where ſteeples tops are onely ſeene ▪ hee caſts
Beyond the Moone, and will be greater yet
In ſpight of Don.
You muſt abuſe the maid
Beyond amends.
But countenance the courſe
My Lord, and it may chance beſide the mirth,
To worke a reformation on the mayden,
Her fathers leave is granted, and thankes promiſ'd,
Our ends are harmleſſe trials.
I betray me ſecrets of ſuch uſe.
Your Lordſhips humbleſt.
A Melancholy grounded, and reſolv'd,
Receiv'd into a habit, argues love,
Or deepe impreſſion of ſtrong diſcontents,
In caſes of theſe raritles a friend
Upon whoſe faith, and confidence, we may
Vent with ſecurity, our griefe becomes
Oft times the beſt Phyſition, for admit
Wee finde no remedy, we cannot miſſe
Adviſe in ſted of comfort, and beleeve
It is an eaſe, Malfato, to disburthen
Our ſoules of ſecret clogges, where they may finde
A reſt in pitty, tho not in redreſſe.
Let all this ſence be yielded to
Perhaps you meaſure what I ſay, the common nature
Of an officious courioſity
Not I Sir.
Or that other privat ends
Sift your retirements—
Neither.
Under favour
Signior Malfato, I am ſent to crave
Your leiſure, for a word or two in private.
To me! your minde
This letter will informe ye.
Letter? howes this? whats here?
Speake yee to me ſir?
Brave riddle: ▪ Ile endevour to unfold it.
How fares the Lord Adurni?
Sure in health ſir.
He is a noble Gentle-man; withall
Happy in his endevours: the generall voyce
Sounds him for courteſie, behaviour, language,
And every faire demeanor, an example:
Titles of honour adde not to his worth,
Who is himſelfe an honour to his titles.
You know from whence this comes.
I doe.
D'ee laugh!
But that I muſt conſider ſuch as Spaniels,
To thoſe who feed and cloath them, I would print
Thy pandariſme upon thy fore-head: there
Beare backe that paper to the hell from whence
It gave thee thy directions, tell this Lord,
He ventur'd on a fooliſh policie,
In aiming at the ſcandall of my bloud,
The tricke is childiſh, baſe, ſay baſe.
You wrong him.
Be wiſe Malfato.
Say, I know this whore.
She who ſent this temptation, was wife
To his abuſed ſervant, and divorc'd
From poore Benatzi, ſenceleſſe of the wrongs
That Madam Levidolche and Adurni
Might revell in their ſports without controule,
Secure, uncheckt.
You range too wildly now,
Are too much inconſiderate.
I am
A gentleman free borne, I never wore
The ragges of any great mans lo • kes, nor fed
Upon their after-meales; I never croucht
Unto the offall of an Office promiſ'd
Reward for long attendance, and then miſt.
I read no difference between this huge,
This monſtrous big word Lord, and Gentleman,
More than the Title ſounds; for ought I learne,
The latter is as noble as the firſt,
I'me ſure more ancient.
Let me tell you then,
You are too bitter, talk you know not what,
Make all men equalls, and confound all courſe
Of order, and of Nature: this is madneſſe.
Tis ſo; and I have reaſon to be mad:
Reaſon Aurelio, by my truth and hopes.
This wit Futelli brings a ſuit of love
From Lenidolche, one however maskt
In colourable privacie, is fam'd
The Lord Adurnies penſioner, at leaſt.
Am I a husband pickt out for a ſtrumpet,
For a caſt ſuit of bawdrie? Aurelio,
You are as I am, you could ill digeſt
The triall of a patience ſo unfit.
Be gone Futelli, doe not mince one ſyllable
Of what you h • are: another fetch like this
May tempt a pe • ce • o rage: ſo ſay, be gone.
I ſhall report your anſwer. Exit.
What have I
Deſerv'd to bee ſo uſ'd? in colder blood
I doe confeſſe nobilit • e requires
Dutie and love, it is a badge of vertue,
By action 〈◊〉 • equir'd, and next in ranke
Vnto anoynted royal ie wherein
Have I neglected diſtance, or forgot
Obſervance to ſuperiours? ſure my name
Was in the • o • e miſtooke.
We will conſider the meaning of this myſtery.
Not ſo,
Let them feare bondage who are ſl • ves to feare,
The ſweeteſt freedome is an honeſt heart. Exeunt.
DExteritie and ſufferance, brave Don,
Are Engines the pure politicke muſt work with.
We underſtand.
In ſubtilties of warre,
(I talke t'ee now in your owne occupation,
Your trade, or what you pleaſe) unto a Souldier,
Surprizall of an enemy by ſtratagem,
Or down-right cutting throats is all one thing.
Moſt certaine: on, proceed.
By way of parallell,
You drill or exerciſe your company,
(No matter which for termes) before you draw
Into the field, ſo in the feats of Courtſhip ▪
Firſt choyce is made of thoughts, behaviour, words,
The ſet of lookes, the poſture of the beard,
Beſol as manus, cringes of the knee,
The very hums and ha's, thumps, and ay mees.
We underſtand all theſe: advance.
Then next,
Your enemy in face, your miſtreſſe (marke it)
Now you conſult either to skirmiſh ſlightly,
Thats careleſſe amors, or to enter battaile,
Then fall to open treatie, or to worke
By ſecre • ſpies or gold: here you corrupt
The Chamber-mayd ▪ a fatall engine, or
Place there an Ambuſesdo, thats contract
With ſome of her neere friends, for halfe her portion,
Or offer truce, and in the interim,
Run upon ſlaughter, tis a noble treachery,
Thats ſweare and lye, ſteale her away: and to her
Caſt caps, and cry Victoria, the field's
Thine owne (my Don) ſhee's thine.
We doe vouchſafe her.
Hold her then faſt.
As faſt as can the armes
Of ſtrong imagination hold her.
No, ſh'as skipt your hold, my imaginations eyes
Perceives ſhe not endures the touch or ſent
Of your war-over-worne habiliments,
Which I forgot in my inſtructions
To warne you of, therefore my warlicke Don,
Apparrell ſpeedily your imagination
With a more courtly out-ſide.
Tis ſoone done.
As ſoone as ſayd, in all the cloathes thou haſt,
More than that walking wardrobe on thy back.
Imagine firſt our rich Mockado doublet,
VVith our cut cloath of gold ſleeves, and our quellio,
Our Diamond buttond Callamancho hoſe,
Our plume of Oſtrich, with the embroydred ſcarfe
The Dutcheſſe Infantaſgo rowld our arme in.
I this is brave indeed.
Our Cloake whoſe cape is
Larded with pearles, which the Indian lacquies
Preſented to our countrey-man De Cortez,
For ranſome of his life, rated in value
At thirteene thouſand piſtolets, the guerdon
Of our atchievement, when wee reſeued
The Infanta from the Bore in ſingle duell,
Neere to the Auſtrian forreſt with this rapier,
This onely, very, naked, ſingle rapier.
Top and top-gallant brave,
VVe will appeare
Before our Amoretta like the iſſue
Of our progenitors.
Imagine ſo,
And that this rich ſute of imagination,
Is on already now (which is moſt probable
As that apparell) here ſtands your Amoretta,
Make your approach and court her.
Luſtre of beauty,
Not to affright your tender ſoule with horrour,
We may diſcend to tales of peace and love,
Soft whiſpers fitting Ladies cloſſers, for
Thunder of cannon, roaring ſmoake and fire,
As if hells maw had vomited confuſion,
The claſh of ſteele, the neighs of barbed Steeds,
Wounds ſpouting blood, townes capering in the ayre,
Caſtles puſh • downe, and Cities plowd with ſwords,
Become great Guzmans Oratory beſt,
Who tho victorious, and during life
Muſt be: yet now grants parley to thy ſmilts.
S'foot, Don, you talke too big, you make her tremble,
Doe you not ſee't imaginarily?
I doe as plainely as you ſaw the death
Of the Auſtrian Bore, ſhe rather heares
Of feaſting then of fighting, take her that way.
Yes we will feaſt my queene, my empreſſe ſaint,
Shal't taſt no delicates but what are dreſt
W • th coſtlier ſpices then the Arabian bird
Sweetens her funerall bed with, we will riot
With every change of meates; which may renue
Our bloud unto a ſpring, ſo pure, ſo high,
That from our pleaſures ſhall proceede a race
Of ſcepter-bra • ing princes, who at once
M • ſt raigne in every quarter of the globe.
Can more be ſaid by one that feeds on herring
And garlicke conſtantlie?
Yes we will feaſt.
Enough, ſhes taken, and will love you now,
As well in buffe, as your imagin'd bravery,
Your dainty ten times dreft buffe, with this language
(Bould man of armes) ſhall win upon her, doubt not
Beyond all ſilken puppetry, thinke no more
Of your mockadoes, calaminchaes, quellios,
Pearle larded capes and diamond buttond breeches,
Leave ſuch poore out-ſide helpes to puling lovers,
Such as Fulgoſo your weake rivall is,
That ſtarveling braind-companion appeare you
At firſt (at leaſt) in your owne warlike faſhion:
I pray be rul'd, and change not a thred about you.
The humour takes (for I ſir, am a man
Affects not ſhifts) I will adventure thus.
Why ſo you carry her from all the world,
Ime proud my ſtarres deſigned me out an inſtrument
In ſuch an hie imploiment.
gravely ſpoken,
You may be prowd ont—
What is loſt is loſt,
Money is traſh, and Ladies are et caetera's,
Play's play; luck's lucke, fortunes an I know what,
You ſee the worſt of me, and whats all this now?
A very ſparke (I vow) you will be ſtil'd,
Fulgoſo the invincible, but did
The faire Spinella looſe an equall part
How much in all d'ee ſay?
Bare threeſcore duckets,
Thirty a peece, we neede not care who know it
She plaid, I went her halfe walkd by and whiſtled
After my uſuall manner thus—unmoved Whiſtles.
As no ſuch thing had ever beene as it were,
Altho I ſaw the winners ſhare my money
His lordſhip, and an honeſt gentleman
Purſ'd it, but not ſo merrily as I
Whiſtled it off—whiſtles
A noble confidence.
Dee note your rivall.
With contempt I doe.
I can forgoe things neerer then my gold,
Allyd to my affections, and my bloud;
Yea honour, as it were, with the ſame kinde.
Of careleſſe confidence, and come off fairely
Too as it were.
But not your love, Fulgoſo.
No, ſhees inherent, and mine owne paſt looſing.
It tickles me to thinke with how much ſtate ▪
You, as it were, did runne at tilt in love
Before your Amoretta.
Broke my lance.
Of wit, of wit.
I meane ſo as it were
And laid flat on her backe, both horſe and woman.
Right as it were.
What elſe man, as it were.
Did you doe this to her, dare you to vant Fulgoſo whi ſtles the ſpaniſh Pavin.
Your triumph we being preſent? um, ha, um.
What thinke you Don, of this brave man?
A ma?
It is ſome truſſe of reeds, or empty caske,
In which the winde with whiſtling ſpores it ſelfe
Beate up Sir, hees your rivall, budge not from him
An inch, your grounds are honor.
Stoutly ventured, Don, hold him too't.
protelt a fine conceit,
A very fine conceite, and thus I tould her,
That for mine owne part, if ſhee lik'd me, ſo,
If not, not; for my ducke or do ſaid I,
It is no fault of mine, that I am noble,
Grant it; another may be noble too,
And then wee'r both one noble better ſtil
Habs-nabs good wincke and chooſe, if one muſt have her,
The other goes without her, beſt of all,
My ſpirit is too high, to fight for woman,
I am too full of mercy to be angrie,
A fooliſh generous quality, from which
No might of man can beat I'me, ime reſolvd.
Haſt thou a ſpirit then ha? ſpeakes thy weapon
Toledo language, Bilbo, or dull Piſa?
If an Italian blade, or ſpaniſh mettall,
Be briefe, we challenge anſwer.
Famous Don.
What does he talke? my weapon ſpeakes no language,
Tis a dutch iron trunchion.
Dutch?
And it need be,
Twill maule one's hide, in ſpight of who ſaies nay
Dutch to a Spaniard, hold me.
Hold mee too
Sirrah if th'art my frind, for I love no fighting,
Yet hold me leaſt in pitty I flie off,
It I muſt fight, I muſt; in a ſcutvie quarrell
I de fie hees and ſhees, twit me with dutch?
Hang dutch and french, hang ſpaniſh and Italians,
Chriſtians and Turkes pew-waw; all's one to me,
I know whats what, I know on which ſide
My bread is butterd.
Butterd? dutch againe?
You come not with intention to affront us.
Front mee no fronts, if thou beeſtangrie ſquable
Heeres my defence, and thy deſtruction—whiſtles a charge
If friends ſhake hands, and goe with me to dinner.
We will embrace the motion, it doth reliſh,
The Cavaleiro treates on termes of honor,
Peace is not to be baulkd on faire conditions.
Still Don is Don the great.
He ſhewes the greatneſſe
Of his vaſt ſtomach in the quicke embracement
Of thothers dinner.
Twas the ready meanes to catch his friendſhip.
Yare a paire of worthies,
That make the nine no wonder.
Now ſince fate
Ordaines that one of two muſt be the man,
The man of men which muſt enjoy alone
Loves darling Amoretta, both take liberty
To ſhew himſelfe before her, without croſſe
Of interruption, one of tother: he
Whoſe ſacred myſtery of earthly bleſſings
Crownes the purſuit; be happy.
And till then, live brothers in ſocietie.
We are faſt.
I vow a match: Ile feaſt the Don to day
And faſt with him to morrow.
Faire conditions.
Futelli and Piero, follow ſpeedily.
My Lord we wait yee.
We ſhall ſoone returne.
Whats that? I ſaw a ſound.
A voyce for certaine.
It nam'd a Lord.
Here are Lords too, we take it,
We carry blood about us, rich and haughty,
As any the twelve Caeſars.
Gulls or Mogulls,
Tag, rag, or other, Hoger-Mogen vanden
Skip-Iacks, or Chouſes. Whoo! the brace are flincht,
The paire of ſhavers are ſneakt from us, Don.
Why? what are we?
The valiant will ſtand too't.
So ſay I, we will eate and drink, and ſquander,
Till all doe ſplit againe.
Match on with greedineſſe.
You cannot anſwer what a generall tongue
Objects againſt your folly, I may curſe
The intereſt you lay claime to in my blood,
Your mother my decre neece did die, I thought
Tooſoon, but ſhe is happy, had ſhe liv'd ▪
Till now, and knowne the vanities of your life
Hath dealt in, ſhe had wiſht herſelfe a grave
Before a timely houre.
Sir, conſider,
My ſex, were I mankinde, my ſword ſhould quit
A wounded honour, and repreave a name
From injury, by printing on their boſomes
Some deadly Character, whoſe drunken ſurfets
Vomit ſuch baſe aſperſions, as I am
Scorne and contempt is vertue: my deſert
Stands far above their malice.
Levidolche, hypocriſie puts on a holy robe,
Yet never changeth nature: call to minde,
How in your girles dayes you fell forſooth
In love, and married, married (harke ye) whom ▪
A trencher-waiter, ſhrewd preferment: but
Your childhood then excuſ'd that fault: for ſo
Footmen have run away with luſty heires,
And ſtable-grooms reacht to ſome fair ones chambers.
Pray let not me be bandied ſir, and baſfaild
By your intelligence.
So toucht to the quicke,
Fine miſtreſſe, I will then rip up at length
The progreſſe of your infancie, in colour
Of diſagreement you muſt be divorc'd,
Were ſo, and I muſt countenance the reaſons
On better hopes I did, nay tooke you home,
Provided you my care, nay juſtified
Your alteration, joyd to entertaine
Such viſitants of worth and ranke, as tendred
Civill reſpects; but then, even then—
What then?
Sweet unkle doe not ſpare me.
I more ſhame
To feare my hoſpitality was bawd
And (name it ſo) to your unchaſte deſires,
Then you to heare and know it.
Whoſe whore am I?
For thats your plaineſt meaning.
Were you modeſt,
The word you utterd laſt would force a bluſh.
Adurni is a bounteous Lord, tis ſayd,
He parts with gold and jewels like a free
And liberall purchaſer, a' wriggles in
To Ladies pleaſures by a right of penſion;
But you know none of this:
You are growne a Taverne talke,
Matter for Fidlers ſongs, I toyle to build
The credit of my family, and you
To pluck up the foundation, even this morning
Before the common Councell, young Malfato
Convented for ſome lands he held; ſuppoſ'd
Belong'd to certaine Orphans, as I queſtion'd
His tenure in particulars, he anſwerd,
My worſhip needed not to flaw his right:
For if the humour held him, he could make
A joynture to my over-living Neece,
Without oppreſſion, bad me tell her too,
She was a kinde young ſoule, and might in time
Be ſued to by a loving man, no doubt.
Here was a jolly breakfaſt.
Uncles are priviledged
More than our parents, ſome wiſe man in ſtate
Hath rectified, no doubt, your knowledge ſir,
Whiles all the policie for publicke buſineſſe,
Was ſpent—for want of matter, I by chance
Fell into grave diſcourſe; but by your leave,
I from a ſtrangers table rather wiſh
To earne my bread, than from a friends by gift,
Be daily ſubj • ct to unfit reproofes.
Come, come, to the poynt.
All the curſes
Due to a raviſher of ſober truth,
Dambe up their graceleſſe mouthes.
Now you turne rampant,
Iuſt in the wenches trimme and garbe, theſe prayers
Speake your devotions purely.
Sir, alas,
What would you have me do? I haue no Orators,
More than my teares, to plead my innocence,
Since you forſake me, and are pleas'd to lend
An open eare againſt my honeſt fame.
Would all their ſpight could harry my contents
Unto a deſperate ruine; Oh deare goodneſſe,
There is a right for wrongs.
There is, but firſt
Si • in commiſſion on your owne defects,
Accufe your ſelfe: be your owne Iury, Iudge,
And executioner, I make no ſport
Of my vexation.
All the ſhort remaines
Of undeſired life, ſhall onely ſpeake
Th ▪ extremitie of penance: your opinion
Enjoynesit too.
Enough; thy teares prevaile
Againſt credulity.
My miſeries,
As in a glaſſe, preſent me the rent face
Of an unguided youth.
No more— Trelcatic,
Some buſineſſe ſpeeds you hither.
Happy newes,
Signior Martino, pray your care; my nephew
Auria hath done brave ſervice: and I heare
(Lets be exceeding private) is returnd
High in the Duke of Florences reſpects,
Tis ſayd, but make no words that a' has firke
And mumbl'd the roguie-Turkes.
Why would you know
His merits ſo unknowne?
I am not yet
Confirmd at full, withdraw, and you ſhall read
All what this paper talkes.
So; Levidolche, you know our minde,
Be cheerefull, come Trelcatio,
Cauſes of joy or griefe, do ſeldome happen
Without companions, necre thy reſolutions
Have given an other birth to my contents ▪
Even ſo, wiſe uncle, much good doe ye—diſcoverd!
I could flie out, mix vengeance with my love,
Unworthy man Malfato, my good Lord
My hot in bloud, rare Lord, growes could too, well
Riſe dotage into rage, and ſleep no longer;
Affection turned to hatred, threatens miſchiefe.
In the next gallory you may behold
Such living pictures Lady, ſuch rich pieces,
Of Kings, and Queens, and Princes, that you'd think
They breath, and ſmile upon yee.
Ha, they crownthes,
Great crownthes oth gold upon their headthes.
Pure gold,
Drawne all in ſtate.
How many horthes pray
Are ith their Chariots?
S • xteene, ſome twenty.
My ſiſter wherefore left we her alone?
Where ſtaies ſhe gentlemen?
Viewing the roomes,
Tis like youle meet her in the gallery.
This houſe is full of curioſities,
Moſt fit for Ladies ſights.
Yeth, yeth, the thight
Of printhethes ith a fine thight.
Good, let us finde her.
Sweet Ladies this way; ſee the doores ſure.
Doubt not.
Enter Adurni, and Spinella. PLeaſures, Beauty, Youth attend yee.
Whiles the ſpring of nature laſteth,
Love and melting thoughts attend yee
Ʋ ſe the time, ere winter haſteth.
Active blood, and free delight,
Place and privacie invite.
Doe doe! be kind as faire,
Looſe not opportunity for ayre.
She is cruell that denies it,
Bountie beſt appeares in granting,
Stealth of ſport as ſoone ſupplies it,
Whiles the dues of love are wonting.
Here's the ſweet exchange of bliſſe,
When each whiſper proves a kiſſe.
In the game are felt no paines,
For in all the looſer gaines.
Plead not faire creature without ſence of pity
So incompaſſionatly gainſt a ſervice,
In nothing faulty more then pure obedience,
My honours and my fortunes are led captives
In triumph by your all-commanding beauty,
And if you ever felt the power of love,
The rigor of an uncontrouled paſſion,
The tyrannie of thoughts conſider mine ▪
In ſome proportion, by the ſtrength of yours,
Thus may you yield and conquer.
Doe not ſtudy
(My Lord) to apparrell folly in the ſteed
Of coſtly colours, henceforth caſt off farre
Far from your nobleſt nature, the contempt
Of goodneſſe, and be gentler to your fame,
By purchaſe of a life to grace your ſtory.
Deare, how ſweetly
Reproofe droopes from that baulmy ſpring your breath,
Now could I read a lecture of my griefes
Un-earth a mine of Jewells at your foote,
Command a golden ſhower to raine downe,
Impoveriſh every Kingdome of the eaſt,
Which trafficks richeſt cloathes, and filkes; would you
Vouchſafe one, unſpleend chiding to my riot,
Elſe ſuch a ſacrifice can but beget
Suſpition of returnes, to my devotion,
In mercenary bleſſings, for that ſaint
To whom I vow my ſelfe, muſt never want
Fit offerings to her altar.
Auria, Auria,
Fight not for name abroad, but come my husband,
Fight for thy wife at home.
Oh never canke
(Deare crulty) one that is ſwo • ne your creature,
Amongſt your countries enemies, I uſe.
No force, but humble words, delivered from
A tongue thats ſecretarie to my heart.
How poorely ſome, tame to their wild deſires,
Fawne on abuſe of vertue, pray my Lord,
Make not your houſe my priſon.
Grant a freedome,
To him who is the bondman to your beauty.
Keepe backe yee cloſe contrivers of falſe pleaſures,
Or I ſhall force ye backe—can it be poſſible
Lockd up and ſingly too, chaſt hoſpitality
A ba • quet in a bed-chamber; Adurni!
Diſhonourable man.
What ſees this rudeneſſe,
That can broach ſcandall here.
For you hereafter,
Oh woman, loſt to every brave report,
Thy wronged Auria is come home with glory,
Prepare a welcome to uncrowne the greatneſſe
Of his prevailing fates,
Whiles you belike,
Are furniſ • d with ſome newes for entertainement
Which muſt become your friendſhip to be knit
More faſt betwixt your ſoules, by my removall,
Both from his heart and memory.
Rich conqueſt,
To triumph on a Ladies injur'd fame,
Without a proofe or warrant.
Have I life Sir,
Faith, Chriſtianity?
Put me on the rack,
The wheele, or the gallies, if—
Peace factors,
In merchandiſe of ſcorne, your ſounds are deadly,
Caſtanna, I could pity your conſent
To ſuch ignoble practice, but I finde.
Courſe fortunes eaſily ſeduc'd, and herein
All clayme to goodneſſe ceaſes.
Uſe your tyranny.
What reſts behind for mee, out with it.
Horror,
Becomming ſuch a forfeit of obedience,
Hope not that any falſity in friendſhip
Can palliate a broken faith, it dares not
Leave in thy prayers (fair vow-breaking want on)
To dreſſe thy ſoule new, whoſe purer whiteneſſe
Is ſullyd by thy change, from truth to folly.
A fearefull ſtorme is hovering, it will fall,
No ſhelter can avoydit, let the guilty
Sink under their owne ruine.
How unmanly
His anger threatens miſchiefe!
Whom, I prethee,
Doth the man ſpeake to?
Lady, be not mov'd,
I will ſtand Champion for your honour, hazard
All what is deereſt to me.
Mercie heaven!
Champion for me, and Auria living? Auria?
He lives, and for my guard my innocence
As free as are my husbands cleareſt thoughts,
Shall keep off vaine conſtructions, I muſt beg
Your charities; ſweet ſiſter, yours to leave me,
I need no fellowes now: let me appeare,
Or mine owne lawyer, or in open court
(Like ſome forſaken client) in my ſuit
Be caſt for want of honeſt plea—oh miſery.
Her reſolution's violent, quickly follow,
By no means (ſir) y'aue followed her already ▪
I feare with too much ill ſucceſſe in triall,
Of unbecomming courteſies; your welcome
Ends in ſo ſad a farewell.
I will ſtand
The roughnes of th'encounter, like a gentleman,
And wait yee to your homes, what are beſal me.
I Say, Don, brother mine, win her and weare her.
And ſo will I; if't be my lucke to looſe her,
I looſe a prety wench, and theres the worſt on't.
Wench ſaid yee, moſt mechanically? faugh!
VVench is your trull, your blowe • , your dowdie, but
(Sir brother) he who names my Queene of love
Without his bonnet vaild, or ſaying grace,
As at Some paranymphall feaſt, is rude,
Nor verſt in literature, Dame Amoretta,
Lo, I am ſworne thy Champion.
So am I too.
Can as occaſion ſerves, if ſhe turne ſcurvie,
Vnſweare my ſelfe again, and nere change colours.
Piſh man, the beſt, though call em, ladies, madames,
Faires, fines, and honies, are but fleſh and bloud,
And now and then too, when the fi • s come on 'em,
Will prove themſelves but flirts, and tirliry pufkins.
Our choler muſt advance.
Doſt long for a beating?
Shalls try a ſlaſh, heres that ſhall do't: Ile tap
A gallon of thy braines, and fill thy hogſhead
With two of wine for't.
Not in friendſhip brother,
Or whiſtle thee into an ague; hang't,
Be ſociable: drinke till we rore and ſcratch;
Then drinke our ſelves aſleepe agen. The faſhion!
Thou doſt not know the faſhion.
Her faire eyes,
Like to a paire of pointed beames drawne from
The Sunnes moſt glorious Orbe, does dazle ſight,
Audacious to gaze there; then over thoſe
A ſeverall bow of jet ſecurely twines
In ſemicircles under them two bankes
Of roſes red and white, divided by
An arch of poliſhe Ivotle, ſurveying
A temple from whence Oracles proceed,
More gracious than Apollos, more deſir'd
Than amorous ſongs of Poets, ſoftly tun'd.
Hey day, what's this?
Oh, but thoſe other parts, all—
All: Hold there, I barre play under boord,
My part yet lies therein; you never ſaw
The things you wier-draw thus.
I have dream't
Of every part about her, can lay open
Her ſeverall inches, as exactly (marke it)
As if I had tooke meaſure with a compaſſe,
A rule, or yard, from head to foot.
Oh rare,
And all this in a dreame.
A very dreame.
My waking brother Souldier is tumd
Into a ſleeping Carpenter or Taylor,
Which goes for halfe a man—whats he? beare up?
Death of reputation, the wheele, ſtrappado, gallies,
Racke, are ridiculous fopperies; goblins to
Fright babies: poore lean-ſould rogues, they
Will ſwowne at the ſcarre of a pinne: one teare
Dropt from their harlots eyes, breeds earth-quakes
In their bones.
Bleſſe us, a monſter patcht of dagger bumbaſt,
His eyes like Copper-baſons, a' has chang'd
Haire with a ſhagge dogge.
Let us then avoyd him,
Or ſtand upon our guard; the foe approches.
Cut-throats by the ſcore abroad, come home, and rot in fripperies, brave man at armes. Goe turne pandor doe, ſtalke for a meſſe of warme broath: damnable, honourable cuts are but badges for a fool to vaunt, the raw rib'd Apothecarie poyſons cum privile gio, and is payd. Oh the common-wealth of beaſts is moſt politick ly ordered.
Brother, wee'l keep aloofe, there is no valour
In tugging with a man fiend
I d. fie him.
It gabbles like I know not what, believe it,
The fellowes a ſhrewd fellow at a pink.
Looke elſe; the Lion roares, and the ſpaniell fawnes. Downe Curre, the Badger bribes the Unicorue, That a Iury may not paſſe upon his pillage: here the Beare fees the Wolfe, for he will not howle gratis, beaſts call pleading howling. So then, there the Horſe complaines of the Apes rank-riding: the Jockie makes mouthes, but is fin'd for it: the Stagge is not jeer'd by the Monkie for his hornes: the Aſſe by the hare for his burthen: The Oxe by the Leopard for his yoke, nor the Goat by the Ram, for his beard, onely the Fox wrappes himſelfe warme in Bever, bids the Cat mouze, the Elephant toyle, the Boare gather akorns, whiles he grinnes, feeds fat, tells tales, laughes at all, and ſleepes ſafe at the Lions feet.—Save ye people.
Why ſave thee too, if thou beeſt of heavens making:
What art?—Feare nothing Don, we have our blades,
Are mettall men our ſelves, try us who dare.
Our brother ſpeakes our minde, thinke what you pleaſe on't.
A match: obſerve well this ſwitch; with this only ſwitch have I paſht out the braines of thirteene Turkes to the dozen for a breakfaſt.
What man? tirteen? is't poſſible thoulyeſt not?
I was once a Scholler, then I beg'd without pitty: from thence I practiz'd law, there a ſcruple of conſcience popt me over the barre: a Souldier I turnd a while, but could not procure the letter of preferment. Merchant I would bee, and a glut of land rats gnawd me to the bones; would have bought an office, but the places with reverſions were catch up: offered to paſſe into the Court, and wanted truſt for cloathes; was laſtly, for my good parts preſt into the Gallies, tooke priſoner, redeemd amongſt other ſlaves by your gay great man, they call him AURIA: and am now I know not who, where, or what. How d ▪ ee like me? ſay.
A ſhaver of all trades; what courſe o f life
Doeſt meane to follow next? ha? ſpeake thy minde.
Nor be thou daunted fellow: we our ſelves
Have felt the frownes of fortune in our dayes.
I want extreamly, exceedingly, hideouſly.
Take that, enjoy it freely, wiſely uſe it. Throwes a purſe
Th'advantage of thy fate, and know the giver. Exit.
Hoy d • , a purſe in troath wh o dropt, ſtay, ſtay,
Vmh; have we gipſies here? oh mine is ſafe
Iſt your purſe, brother Don?
Not mine, I ſeldome
Weare ſuch unfaſhionable traſh about me.
Haſt any money in it, honeſt blade?
A bots on empty purſes.
Wee defie them.
Stand from about me, as you are mortall, you are dull clod-pated lumpes of mire and garbiſh. This is the land of Fairies, Emperiall Queene of Elves, I do croutch to thee, vow my ſervices, my blood, my ſinewes to thee, ſweete ſoveraigne of largeſſe, and liberality—a French Taylor neate; Perſian Cooke; dainty! Greeke Wines; rich Flanders Mares; ſtately Spaniſh Sallads, poy nant, Venetian, wanton, raviſhing, Engliſh Bawd unmatchable ſirs I am fitted.
All theſe thy followers, miſerable pigmies
Prate ſence and don't be mad, I like thy humour,
Tis pretty odde, and ſo as one might ſay,
I care not greatly if I entertaine thee,
Doſt want a maſter? if thou doſt I am for thee
Elſe chooſe, and ſneake up; piſh I ſcorne to flinch man.
Forſake not faire advancement, money certes
Will fleet and drop off, like a cozening friend,
Who holds it, holds a ſlippery Eele byth' tayle,
Unleſſe he gripe it faſt, be ruld by counſell.
Excellent, what place ſhall I be admitted to?
Chamber, wardrobe, cellar, or ſtable.
Why one and all, th'art welcome, lets ſhake hands on't,
Thy name?
Parado Sir
The great affaires
I ſhall employ thee moſt in wilbe newes,
And telling whats a clocke, for ought I know yet.
It is ſir to ſpeake punctually ſome hour and halfe
Eight three thirds of two ſeconds of one minute over at moſt, Sir
I doe not aske thee now, or if I did
We are not much the wiſer, and for newes—
Auria, the fortunate is this day to bee receavd with great
ſolemnity at the city counſel houſe, the ſtre • tes are already throngd
with lookers on.
Thats well remembred, brother Don let's trudge,
Or we ſhall come too late.
By no meanes, brother.
Waite cloſe my ragged new-come.
As your ſhaddowes.
Your favours with theſe honours, ſpeake your bounties
And tho the low deſerts of my ſucceſſe
Appeare in your conſtructions faire and goodly,
Yet I attribute to a noble cauſe,
Not my abilities, the thankes due to them,
The Duke of Florence hath too highly prizd
My duty in my ſervice, by example,
Rather to cheriſh and encourage vertue,
In ſpirits of action, then to crowne the iſſue
Of feeble undertakings. whiles my life
Can ſtand in uſe I ſhal no longer rate it
In value then it ſtirres to pay that debt,
I owe my countrie for my birth and fortunes.
Which to make good, our ſtate of Genoa
Not willing that a native of her owne,
So able for her ſafety, ſhould take penſion
From any other Prince; hath caſt upon you
The government of Corſica.
Addes thereto
Beſides th'allowance yearly due, for ever
To you and to your heires, the full revenew
Belonging to Savona; with the office
Of Admirall of Genoa.
Preſenting
By my hands, from their publique treaſury,
A thouſand Ducates.
But they limit only
One moueth of ſtay, for your diſpatch, no more.
In all your great attempts, may you grow thrifty,
Secure, and proſperous.
If you pleaſe to ranke,
Amongſt the humbleſt one that ſhall attend
Inſtructions under your command, I am
Ready to waite the charge.
Oh ſtill the ſtate
Engageth me her creature with the burthen
Unequall for my weakeneſſe, to you gentlemen
I will prove friendly honeſt, of all mindefull.
In memory (my Lord, ſuch is your ſtile now)
Of your late fortunate exployts, the counſell
Amongſt their generall acts, have regiſtred
The great Dukes letters, witneſſe of your merit
To ſtand in characters upon record.
Load upon load let not my want of modeſty
Treſpaſſe againſt good manners, I muſt ſtudy
Retirement to compoſe this weighty buſineſſe
And moderately diſgeſt ſo large a plenty.
For feare it ſwel unto a ſurfeit.
May I
be bould to preſſe a viſit?
At your pleaſure,
Good time of day, and peace,
O • s: health to your Lordſhip.
What of Spinella yet?
Quite loſt no prints,
Or any tongue of • racing her, how ever
Matters are huddled up: I doubt my Lord
Her husband carries little peace about him.
fall danger what fall can, ſhe is a goodneſſe
Above temptation, more to be ador'd
Then ſifted; I'me too blame ſure.
Levidolche.
For her part too ▪ laughd at Malfatos frenzie
(Juſt ſo ſhe termd it) but for you (my Lord)
She ſaid ſhee thankd your charity, which lent
Her crooked ſoule, before it left her body,
Some reſpit, wherein it might learne againe
The means of growing ſtreight.
Shee has found mercy,
Which I will ſeeke, and ſue for.
You are happy.
Count of Savona, Genoas Admirall,
Lord governor of Corſica, enrould
A Worthy of my country, ſought and ſu'd to
Praiſ'd, courted, flatterd; ſure this bulke of mine,
Tayles in the ſize a timpany of greatneſſe
Puffes up too monſtrouſly my narrow cheſt,
How ſurely doſt thou malice, theſe extremes,
Vncomfortable man? when I was needy,
Caſt naked on the flats of barren pitty,
Abated to an ebbe ſo low, that boyes
A Cocke-horſe friskd about me, without plunge
You could chat gravely then, in formall tones,
Reaſon moſt paradoxically; now
Contempt and wilful grudge at my upriſing
becalmes your learned noyſe.
Such floriſh Auria,
Flies with ſo ſwift a gale, as it will waſt
Thy ſuddaine joyes into a faithleſſe harbor.
Canſt mutter miſchiefe, I obſervd your dulneſſe
Whiles the whole ging crowd to me harke my triumphs
Are eccho'd under every roofe, the ayre
Is ſtreightend with the ſound, there is not roome
Enough to brace them in, but not a thought
Doth pierce into the griefe that cabins heare,
Here through a creeke a little in-let crawles,
A flake no bigger than a ſiſters threed,
Which ſets the region of my heart a fire.
I had a kingdome once, but am depoſ ▪ d
From all that royaltie of bleſt content,
by a confederacle twixt love and frailtie.
glories in publik view, but adde to miſerie,
Which travailes in unreſt at home.
At home?
That home Aurelio ſpeakes of, I have loſt,
And which is worſe, when I have rowld about,
Toild like a pilgrime, round this globe of earth,
Wearied with care, and over-worne with age,
Lodg'd in the grave, I am not yet at home,
There rots but halfe of me, the other part
Sleeps, heaven knowes where, would ſhe and I my wife,
I meane, but what alas talke I of wife,
The woman, would we had together fed
On any out-caſt parings, courſe and mouldy,
Not liv'd divided thus, I could have beg'd
For both, for't had been pitty ſhe ſhould ever
Have felt ſo much extremitie.
This is not
Patience requir'd in wrongs of ſuch vile nature,
You pittie her, thinke rather on revenge.
Revenge! for what? (uncharitable friend)
On whom? lets ſpeake a little pray with reaſon,
You found Spinella in Adurnies houſe,
Tis like a' gave her welcome very likely,
Her ſiſter and another with her, ſo
Invited, nobly done; but he with her
Privatly chamberd, he deſerves no wife
Of worthy qualitie, who dares not truſt
Her vertue in the proofes of any danger.
But I broke ope the doores upon em.
Marry, it was a ſlovenly preſumption,
And puniſhable by a ſharpe rebuke.
I tell you ſir, I in my younger growth,
Have by the ſtealth of privacie enjoyd
A Ladies cloſet, where to have prophan'd
That ſhrine of chaſtitie and innocence,
With one unhallowed word, would have exild
The freedome of ſuch favour into ſcorne.
Had any he alive then ventur'd there,
With foule conſtruction, I had ſtampt the juſtice
Of my unguiltie truth upon his heart.
Adurni might have done the like, but that
The conſcience of his fault in coward blood,
bluſht at the quick ſurpriſall.
O fie, fie.
How ill ſome argue in their ſowre reproofe,
Againſt a partie liable to law:
For had that Lord offended with that creature,
Her preſence would have doubled every ſtrength
Of man in him, and juſtified the forfeit
Of noble ſhame, elſe twas enough in both
With a ſmile onely to correct your rudeneſſe.
Tis well you make ſuch uſe of neighbours courteſie,
Some kinde of beaſts are tame, and hug their injuries:
Such way leads to a fame too.
Not uncivilly, though violently, friend.
Wherefore th • n, thinke yee,
Can ſhe abſent her ſelfe, if ſhe be blameleſſe?
You grant of courſe, your triumphs are proclaim'd,
And I in perſon told her your returne.
Where lies ſhe hid the while?
That reſts for anſwer
In you, now I come t'ee, vve have exchang'd
boſomes, Aurelio, from our yeares of childhood,
Let me acknovvledge vvith vvhat pride I ovvne
A man ſo faithfull, honeſt, faſt, my friend:
He vvhom if I ſpeake fully, never faild
by teaching truſt to me, to learne of mine,
I vviſht my ſelfe thine equall; if l aymd
A wrong, twas in an envie of thy goodneſſe,
So dearly witneſſe with me my integritie,
I layd thee up to heart, that from my love,
My wife was but diſtinguiſht in her ſex,
Give back that holy ſignature of friendſhip,
Canceld ▪ defac'd, pluckt off, or I ſhall urge,
Accounts ſcor'd on the tally of my vengeance,
Without all former complements.
D'ee imagine
I fawne upon your fortunes, or intrude
Upon the hope of bettering my eſtate,
That you caſhiere me at a minutes warning?
No, Auria, I dare vie with your reſpects,
Put both into the ballance, and the poyſe
Shall make a ſetled ſtand, perhaps the proffer,
So frankly vowd at your departure firſt
Of ſetling me a partner in your purchaſe,
Leads you into opinion of ſome ends
Of mercenary falſhood, yet ſuch wrong
Leſt ſuites a noble ſoule.
By all my ſorrowes,
The mention is too courſe.
Since then th'occaſion
Preſents our diſcontinuance, uſe your libertie:
For my part I am reſolute to die
The ſame my life profeſt me.
Piſh, your faith
Was never in ſuſpicion; but conſider,
Neither the Lord nor Lady, nor the bawd,
Which ſhuffled them together, opportunitie
Have faſtned ſtaine on my unqueſtion'd name,
My friends raſh indiſcretion was the bellowes
Which blew the cole now kindled to a flame,
Will light his ſlander to all wandring eyes.
Some men in giddie zeale ore-doe that office
They catch at, of whoſe number is Aurelio:
For I am certaine, certaine it had beene
Impoſſible, had you ſtood wiſely ſilent,
but my Spinella, trembling on her knee,
Would have accuſd her breach of truth, have bg'd
A ſpeedy execution on her treſpaſſe,
Then with a juſtice lawfull as the magiſtrates,
Might I have drawne my ſword againſt Adurni,
Which now is ſheathed and ruſted in the ſcabberd;
Good thankes to yonr cheape providence, once more
I make demand—my wife—you—ſi • .
Roare lowder
The noyſe affrights not me, threaten your enemies,
And prove a valiant tongue man—now muſt follow,
by way of method, the exact condition
Of rage which runnes to mutinie in friendſhip.
Auria come on, this weapon lookes not pale
At fight of that againe heare and believe it,
What I have done, was well done and well meant;
Twenty times over, were it new to doe.
I de doo't and doo't, and boaſt the paines religious;
Yet ſince you ſhake me off, I ſlightly value
Other ſev • rity.
Honor and duty
Stand my compurgators, never did paſſion
Purpoſe ungentle uſage of my ſword,
Againſt Aurelio, let me rather want
My hands, nay friend, a heart then ever ſuffer
Such dotage enter here, if I muſt looſe
Spinella, let me not proceed to miſery,
by looſing my Aurelio, we through madneſſe,
Frame ſtrange conceits, in our diſcourſing braines,
And prate of things as we pretend they were,
Joyne helpe to mine (good man) and let us liſten
After this ſtraying ſoule, and till we finde her,
beare our diſcomfort quietly.
So doubtleſſe,
She may be ſoone diſcoverd.
Thats ſpoke chearefully.
Why theres a friend now,—Auria and Aurelio
At oddes oh't cannot be, muſt not, and ſhanot—
Enter Caſtanna.
But looke Caſtannas here,—welcome faire figure
Of a choice Jewel, lockd up in a cabinet,
More pretious then the publique view ſhould ſully.
Sir how you are informd, or on what termes
Of prejudice againſt my courſe, or cuſtome ▪
Opinion ſwaies your confidence, I know not
Much anger, if my feares perſwade not falſely,
Sits on this gentlemans ſterne brow, yet ſir,
If an unhappy maids word may finde credit,
As I wiſh harme to no body on earth,
So would all good folkes may wiſh none to me.
None does ſweete ſiſter.
If they doe, deare heaven
Forgive them is my prayer, but perhaps,
You might conceave (and yet methinkes you ſhold not)
How I am faulty in my ſiſters abſence,
Indeed tis nothing ſo, nor was I knowing
Of any private ſpeech my Lord intended,
Save civill entertainement, pray what hurt
Can fall out in diſcourſe, if it be modeſt?
Sure noble men will ſhew that they are ſuch
With thoſe of their owne ranke, and that was all
My ſiſter can be charg'd with.
Iſt not friend, an excellent maide?
Deſerves the beſt of fortunes;
I ever ſpoke her vertuous.
With your leave,
You uſ'd moſt cruell language to my ſiſter,
Enough to fright her wits, not very kinde
To me my ſelfe, ſhe ſighd when you were gone,
Deſird no creature elſe ſhould follow her;
And in good truth, I was ſo full of weeping,
I markd not well which way ſhee went.
Staid ſhe not
Within the houſe then?
Paſſe not ſhe— Aurelio
Was paſſing rough.
Strange! no where to be found out ▪
Not yet, but on my life, ere many howers,
I ſhall heare from her.
Shalt thou? worthy maide,
Thaſt brought to my ſicke heart a cordiall—friend
Good newes—moſt ſweete Caſtanna.
May it prove ſo.
The paper in the purſe for my directions appoynted this the place, the time now, here dance I attendance—ſhee is come already.
Parado, ſo I over heard you nam'd.
A muſhrome ſprung up in a minute, by the ſun-ſhine of your benevolent grace, liberality and hoſpitable compaſſion (moſt magnificent beauty) have long ſince lyen bed-rid in the aſhes of the old world till now, your illuſtrious charity hath rak'd up the dead embers by giving life to a worm inevitably devoted yours as you ſhall pleaſe to new ſhape mee.
A gratefull man (it ſeemes) where gratitude
Has harbor; other furniture becomming
Accompliſh'd qualities muſt needs inhabit,
What country claimes your birth?
None, I was borne at ſea, as my mother was in paſſage from cape Ludugory to cape Clagliaty toward Affrick in Sardinia, was bred up in Aquilaſtro, and at yeares put my ſelfe in ſervice un der the Spaniſh Viceroy: till I was taken priſoner by the Turkes. I have taſted in my daies hanſome ſtore of good and bad, and am thankefull for both.
You ſeeme the iſſue then of honeſt parents.
Reputed no leſſe: many children oftentimes inherit their lands who peradventure never begot them: my mothers husband was a very old man at my birth, but no man is too old to father his wives childe, your ſervant I am ſure I will ever prove my ſelfe entirely.
Dare you be ſecret?
Yes.
And ſuddaine.
Yes.
But withall, ſure of hand, and ſpirit.
Yes, yes, yes.
I uſe not many words, the time prevents 'em,
A man of quality has rob'd mine honour.
Name him.
Adurni.
A' ſhall bleed.
Malfato contemn'd my proffered love.
Yoake 'em in death—whats my reward?
Propoſe it, and enjoy it.
You for my wife.
Ha!
Nothing elſe, deny mee.
And ile betray your counſells to your ruine;
Elſe doe the feate couragiouſly—conſider.
I doe diſpatch the taske I have enjoyn'd,
Then claime my promiſe.
No ſuch matter, pretty one,
Weele marry firſt—or—farewell.
Stay, examine
From my confeſſion what a plague thou draw'ſt
Into thy boſome, tho I bluſh to ſay it,
Know I have without ſence of ſhame, or honour,
Forſooke a lawfull marriage bed, to dally
Betweene Adurnis armes.
This Lords.
The ſame; more not content with him I courted,
A newer pleaſure, but was there refus'd by him I nam'd ſo late.
Malfato.
Right, am henceforth reſolutely bent to print
My foll es on their hearts, then change my life
For ſome rare pennance, canſt thou love me now?
Better I doe believe tis poſſible you may mend,
All this breakes off no bargain.
Accept my hand, with this a faith as conſtant
As vowes can urge, nor ſhall my haſte prevent
This contract, which death only muſt divorce.
Settle the time.
Meete here to morrow night,
We wil determine further, as behoves us.
How is my new love call'd?
Levidolche, be confident, I bring a worthy portion;
But you'l ſlie off.
Not I, by all thats noble,
A kiſſe—farewell—deare fate.
Love is ſharpe ſighted
And can pierce through the cunning of diſguiſes,
Falſe pleaſures I caſheere ye, faire truth welcome.
HEre you are ſafe, (ſad coſen) if you pleaſe
May over-ſay the circumſtance of what
You late diſcourſt, mine eares are gladly oper,
For I my ſelfe am in ſuch hearty league
With ſolitary thoughts, that penſive language
Charmes my attention.
But my husbands honours,
By how much more in him they ſparkle cleerly
by ſo much more they tempt beliefe to credit
The wrack and ruine of my injur'd name.
Why coſen ſhould the earth cleave to the rootes,
The ſeas and heavens be mingled in diſorder,
Your purity with unaffrighted eyes
Might waite the uproare, tis the guilty trembles
At horrors, not the innocent, you are cruell
In cenſuring a libertle allowd.
Speake freely, gentle couſin, was Adurni
Importunately wanton?
In exceſſe
Of entertainment, elſe not.
Not the boldneſſe
Of an uncivill courtſhip.
What that meaht,
I never underſtood, I have at once
Set barres between my beſt of earthly joyes,
And beſt of men, ſo excellent a man
As lives without compariſon, his love
To me was matchleſſe.
Yet put caſe, ſweet couſin,
That I could name a creature, whoſe affection
Followd your Auria in the height: affection
To you; even to Spinella ▪ true and ſetled,
As ever Auria's was ▪ can, is, or will be.
You may not chide the ſtorie.
Fortunes minions
Are flattered, not the miſerable.
Liſten to a ſtrange tale, which thus the authour ſigh'd,
A kinſman of Spinella (ſo it runnes)
Her fathers ſiſters ſoune, ſome time before
Auria the fortunate poſſeſt her beauties,
Became inamor'd of ſuch rare perfections,
As ſhe was ſtor'd with, fed his idle hopes
With poſſibilities of lawfull conqueſt,
Propoſ'd each difficultie in purſuit
Of what his vaine ſuppoſall ſtil'd his owne,
Found in the argument one onely flaw
Of conſcience, by the nearneſſe of their blouds,
Unhappy ſcruple, eaſily diſpenc'd with,
Had any friends advice reſolv'd the doubt ▪
Still on a' lov'd, and lov'd, and wiſht, and wiſht,
Eft-ſoone began to ſpeake, yet ſoone broke off,
And ſtill the fondling durſt not, cauſe a' durſt not.
Twas wonderfull,
Exceeding wonderfull,
Beyond all wonder, yet tis knowne for truth,
After her marriage, when remaind not ought
Of expectation to ſuch fruitleſſe dotage.
His reaſon then, now, then could not reduce
The violence of paſſion, tho a'vowd
Never to unlock that ſecret, ſcarce to her
Herſelfe, Spinella, and withall reſolv'd,
Not to come neare her preſence, but to avoyd
All opportunities how ever proffered.
An underſtanding duld by th'infelicitie
Of conſtant ſorrow, is not apprehenſive
In pregnant noveltie, my eares receive
The words you utter, couſin, but my thoughts
Are faſtned on another ſubject.
Can you embrace, ſo like a darling, your owne woes,
And play the tyrant with a partner in them?
Then I am thankfull for advantage, urg'd
By fatall and enjoynd neceſſitie,
To ſtand up in defence of injur'd vertue,
Will againſt any, I except no qualitie,
Maintaine all ſuppoſition miſapplied,
Unhoneſt, falſe, and villanous.
Deare couſin, as y'are a gentleman,
Ile bleſſe that hand,
Whoſe honourable pittie ſeales the paſport
For my inceſſant turmoyles, to their reſt.
If I prevaile, (which heaven forbid) theſe ages
VVhich ſhall inherit ours, may tell poſtericie
Spinella and Malfato for a kinſman,
By noble love made jealons of her fame.
No 〈◊〉 I dare not heare it.
All is ſayd:
Henceforth ſhall never ſyllable proceed, Enter Ca ſtanna.
From my unpleaſant voyce, of amorous folly—
Your ſummons warn'd me hither, I am come
Siſter, my ſiſter twas an unkinde part,
Not to take me along w'ee.
Chide her for it,
Caſtanna, this houſe is as freely yours,
As ever was your fathers.
we conceave ſo,
Tho your late ſtrangeneſſe hath bred mervalle in us,
But wherefore, ſiſter, keepes your ſilence diſtance?
Am I not welcome t'ee?
Lives Auria ſafe?
Oh prithee doe not heare me call him husband,
before thou canſt reſolve what kinde of wife
His fury termes the runne away, ſpeake quickely,
Yet doe not ſtay Caſtanna, I am loſt,
His friend hath ſet before him a bad woman,
And hee, good man, believes it.
Now in truth—
Hold, my heart trembles, I perceive thy tongue
Is great with ills and haſtes to be delivered,
I ſhould not uſe Caſtanna ſo, firſt tell me,
Shortly and truely tell me ▪ how he does.
In perfect health.
For that my thankes to heaven.
The world hath not another wife like this,
Coſen you will not heare your ſiſter ſpeake,
So much your paſſion rules.
Even what ſhe pleaſes: goe on Caſtanna.
Your moſt noble husband
Is deafe to all reports, and only grieves
At his ſoules love, Spinellas cauſeleſſe abſence.
Why looke ye coſen now?
Indeede.
Will value no counſel, takes no pleaſure in his greatneſſe,
Neither admits of likelyhood at all,
That you are living: if you were hee's certaine
It were impoſſible you could conceale
Your welcomes to him, being all one with him,
But as for jealouſie of your diſhonor,
Hee both laughes at and ſcornes it.
Does a'.
Therein he ſhewes himſelfe deſertfull of his happineſſe,
Methinks the newes ſhould cauſe ſome motion ſiſter.
You are not well.
Not well.
I am unworthy ▪
Of whom? what? why?
Goe coſen, come Caſtanna.
The ſtate in counſel is already ſet,
My comming will be 'late; now therfore gentlemen,
This houſe is free as your intents are ſober,
Your paines ſhall be accepted.
Mirth ſometimes falls into earneſt ſignior.
Wee for our parts aime at the beſt.
You wrong your ſelvs & meelſe, good ſucceſſe t'ee ▪ Exit.
Futilli tis our wiſeſt courſe to follow
Our paſtime with d ſcretion, by which meanes
Wee may ingratiate as our buſineſſe hits,
Our undertakings to great Aurias favour.
I grow quite weary of this lazie cuſtome
Attending on the fruitleſſe hopes of ſervice,
For meate and ragges, a wit, a ſhrewd preferment
Study ſome ſcurrill jeſts, grow old and beg
No let em be admit'd that love foule linnen.
Ile runne a new courſe.
Get the coyne we ſpend,
And knocke 'em ore the pate who jeers our earnings—
Huſht man, one ſuiter comes.
The tother followes.
Be not ſo lowd—here comes Madona ſweete lips.
Mithtreth, inthooth for thooth, will lithpe it to uth.
Dentlemen then ye ith thith muthicke yourth, or can ye tell what great manths fidleth, made it tith vedee petty noyth, but who thold thend it.
does not your ſelfe know Lady.
I doe not uth
To thpend lip labour upon quethtionths,
That I my thelfe can anthwer.
No ſweet madam,
Your lips are deſtind to a better uſe,
Or elſe the proverbe failes of liſping maids.
Kithing you mean pey come behind with your mockths then,
My lipthes will therve the one to kith the other —
How now whath neckt?
VVHat hoe we come to be merry,
Open the doores a Joviall crew,
Luſty boyes and free, and very,
Very, very luſty boys are wee,
We can drinke till all looke blew,
Dance ſing and roare,
Never give ore.
As long as we have nere an eye to ſee
Pithee, pithee ▪ leths come in ▪
Oue thall all oua favous win,
Dently, dently, we thall paſſe,
None kitheth like the lithping laſſe.
What call yee this a ſong?
Yeth a delithious thing, and wondroth prety;
A very country catch—doubtleſſe ſome prince
Belikehath ſent it to congratulate
Your nights repoſe.
Thinke ye tho thignior,
It muth be then thome unknowne obthcure printh
That thuns the light.
Perhaps the prince of darkeneſſe.
Of darkeneth what ith he?
A courtier matchleſſe
A'woes, and wins, more beauties to his love
Then all the kings on earth.
Whea thandeth hith court pey—
This gentleman approaching I preſume,
Has more relation to his court then I,
And comes in time t'informe ye.
Thinck ye tho time thure you know him,
Lady youl perceave it ▪
She ſeemes in my firſt entrance to admire me,
Proteſt ſhe eyes me round; Fulg ▪ ſhees is thine owne.
Noble Fulgoſo.
Did you heare the muſique?
Twas I that brought it, was't not tickling? ah ha
Pay what pinth thent it.
Prince, no Prince but we,
We ſet the ditty and compoſd the ſong,
Theresnos a note or foote in't, but our owne,
And the pure trodden morter of this braine,
We can doe things and things.
Doo'd thing't youa thelfe then.
Nay, nay, I could never ſing
More then a gib cat, or a very howler,
But you ſhall heareme whiſtle it.
Thith thingth thome jethter,
Thure he belongth unto the printh of darkneth.
Yes, and ile tell you what his office is,
His Prince delights himſelfe exceedingly
In birds of divers kindes, this gentleman
Is keeper and inſtructer of his black-birds, he tooke his skill firſt
from his fathers carter.
Tith wonderfull to thee by what thrange meanes
Thome men are raiſd to plathes.
I doe heare you,
And thanke ye heartily for your good wills,
In ſetting forth my parts, but what I live on,
Is ſimple trade of money from my lands.
Hang ſharkes, I am no ſhifter.
Ith pothible—
Enter Guzman.
Bleth uth whoth thith?
Oh it is the man of might.
May my addreſſe to beauty lay no ſcandall
Upon my martiall honour, ſince even Mars
Whom as in war, in love I imitate,
Could not reſiſt the ſhafts of Cupid, therefore
As with the god of Warre, I deigne to ſtoop ▪
Lady vouchſafe loves goddeſſe like to yield
Your fairer hand unto theſe lips, the portalle
Of valiant breath, that hath ore-turnd an army.
Fay'a weather, keepe me, what a thorme ith thith?
Oh Don keepe off at further diſtance yet
A little farther, doe you not obſerve
How your ſtrong breath hath terrifyd the Lady?
Ile ſtop the breath of war and breath as gently
As a perfum'd paire of ſucking bellowes
In ſome ſweete Ladies chamber, for I can
Speake Lyon-like, or ſheepe like, when I pleaſe.
Stand by then, without noiſe a while brave Don
And let her only view your parts, they'le take her.
〈◊〉 publiſh them in ſilence.
Stand you there
Fulgoſo the magnificent.
Heare?
Juſt there,
Let her ſurvey you both; youle be her choyce
Nere doubt it, man.
I cannot doubt it, man.
But ſpeake not till I bid you.
I may whiſtle.
A little to your ſelfe, to ſpend the time.
Both foolth you thay.
But heare them for your ſport.
Don ſhal begin,—begin Don, ſhe has ſurveyd
Your outwards and your inwards through the rents,
And wounds of your apparell.
She is politicke,
My out-ſide Lady ſhrowds a prince obſcurd;
I thanke ye for your muthicke printh.
My words
Are muſique to her.
The muthicke and the thong
You thent me by thith whithling thing, your man?
She tooke him for my man, love thou wert juſt.
I wonot hould, his man, tis time to ſpeake
Before my time, oh ſcurvy, I his man?
That has no meanes for meat or ragges, and ſeame-rents.
Have I with this one rapier.
He has no other.
Paſt through a field of pikes, whoſe heads I lopt
As eaſily as the bloody minded youth
Lopt off the poppy heads.
The puppit heads.
Have I—have I—have I?
Thou lyeſt thou haſt not,
And ile mayn't.
Have I—but let that paſſe,
For tho my famous acts were damb'd to ſilence,
Yet my diſcent ſhall crowne me thy ſuperior.
That I would lithen to.
Liſt and wonder,
My great, great Grandſir was an ancient Duke,
Stild Dis? vir di Gonzado.
Thats in Spaniſh
An incorrigible rogue, without a fellow,
An unmatchd rogue, he thinkes we underſtand not.
So was my grandfather height Argozile.
An arrant, arrant theefe leader, pray mocke it.
My grandſire by the mothers ſide a Condee,
Condee Scrivano.
A crop-eard Scrivener.
Whoſe ſon, my mothers father was a Marquis,
H •• io di puto.
Thats the ſonne of a whore.
And my renowned ſire Don Piccace.
In proper ſence a raſcall—O brave Don.
Huio di una pravado—
A'goes on,
Son of a branded bitch—high ſpirited Don,
Had honors both by ſea and land, to wit.
The Gallies and Bride-well.
Ile not endure it,
To heare a canting mungrell—Heare me lady,
Tis no faire play.
I care not faire or foule,
I from a King derive my pedigree,
King Oberon by name, from whom my father
The mightie and couragious Mounti-banco,
Was lineally deſcended, and my mother
(In right of whoſe blood I muſt ever honor
The lower Germany) was a Harlekine.
He blow up
The Spaniard preſently by his mother ſide.
Her father was Grave Hansvan Herne, the ſon
Of Hogen Mogen, dat de droates did ſneighen
Of veirteen hundred Spaniards in one neict.
Oh Diabolo.
Ten thouſand Divels, nor Diabolos
Shall fright me from my pedigree, my uncle
Yacob van Flagon drought, with Abraham Snorten fert
And yongſter Brogen foh with fourſcore hargubuſh,
Manag'd by well-lin'd Butter-boxes, tooke
A thouſand Spaniſh Iobber-nowles by ſurpriſe,
And beat a ſconce about their eares.
My furie
Is now but juſtice on thy forfeit life.
Lath they thall not fight.
Feare not, ſweet Lady.
Be adviſ ▪ d great ſpirits.
My fortunes bid me to be wiſe in duels,
Elſe hang't, who cares?
Mine honour is my tutour,
Already try'd and knowne.
Why there's the poynt,
Mine honour is my tutour too, Noble men
Fight in their perſons, ſcorn't, tis out of faſhion,
Theres none but hare-brain'd youths of metall uſe it.
Yet put not up your ſwords, it is the pleaſure
Of the faire Lady, that you quit the field,
With brandiſht blades in hand.
And more to ſhew
your ſuffering valour, as her equall favours,
you both ſhould take a competence of kickes.
How?
Thus and thus, away you brace of ſtinkards,
Pheugh, is it were.
Why ſince it is her pleaſure, I dare and will endure it.
Pheugh.
A way, but ſtay below.
Budge not, I charge yee,
Till you have further leave.
Mine honour claimes
The laſt foot in the field.
Ile lead the van then.
yet more, be gone, are not theſe pretious ſuiters—
What tumults fright the houſe?
A brace of Caſtrels,
That flattered ſir, about this lovely game
your daughter, but they durſt not give the ſouze
And ſo tooke hedge.
Mee Haggards, Buzzards, Kites.
Ith korne, thuch trumpe and will thape my luffe,
Henth forth ath thall my father betht direct me.
Why now thou ſingſt in tune, my Amoretta ▪
And my good friends, you have likewiſe Phyſicians,
Preſcrib'd a healthfull dyet, I ſhall thinke on
A bounty for your paines, and will preſent yee
To noble Auria: ſuch as your deſcents
Commend, but for the preſent we muſt quit
This roome to privacie: they come—
Nay predee,
Leave me not Dentlemen.
We are your ſervants.
Y'are welcome, be aſſur'd you are, for proofe,
Retrive the boldneſſe (as you pleaſe to terme it)
Of viſit to commands, if this mans preſence
Be not of uſe, diſmiſſe him.
Tis (with favour)
Of conſequence my Lord, your friend may witneſſe
How farre my reputation ſtands ingag'd
To noble reconcilement.
I obſerve
No partie here amongſt us, who can challenge
A motion of ſuch honour.
Could your lookes
Borrow more cleare ſeveritie and calmneſſe,
Than can the peace of a compoſed ſoule;
Yet I preſume, report of my attempt
(Train'd by a curioſity io youth)
For ſcattering clouds before 'em, hath raiſ'd tempeſts
Which will at laſt break out.
Hid now (moſt likely)
I'th darkneſſe of your ſpeech.
you may be plainer.
I ſhall my Lord, that I intended wrong,
Ha? wrong? to whom?
To Auria, and as farre
As language could prevaile, did—
Take advice,
(Young Lord) before thy tongue betray a ſecret
Conceald yet from the world; heare and conſider
In all my flight of vanitie and giddineſſe,
VVhen ſcarce the wings of my exceſſe were fledg'd,
VVhen a diſtemperature of youthfull heat,
Might have excuſ'd diſorder and ambition,
Even then, and ſo from thence till now the down
Of ſoftneſſe is exchang'd for plumes of age ▪
Confirm'd and hardned, never durft I pitch
On any howſoever likely reſt,
VVhere the preſumption might be conſterd wrong,
The word is hatefull, and the ſence wants pardon:
For as I durſt not wrong the meaneſt, ſo
He who but onely aimd by any boldneſſe,
A wrong to me, ſhould finde I muſt not beare it,
The one is as unmanly as the other.
Now without interruption.
Stand Aurelio,
And juſtifie thine accuſation boldly,
Spare me the needleſſe uſe of my confeſſion,
And having told no more, then what thy jealouſie
Poſſeſt thee with againe before my face,
Vrge to thy friend the breach of hoſpitalitie
Adurni treſpaſt in, and thou conceavſt
Againſt Spinella; why proofes grow faint,
If barely not ſuppoſ'd, Ile anſwere guilty.
You come not here to brave us.
No Aurelio.
But to reply upon that brittle evidence,
To which thy cunning never ſhall rejoyne.
I make my Iudge my Iurie, be accountant
VVhither withall the eagerneſſe of ſpleene
Of a ſuſpitious rage can plead, thou haſt
Enforc'd the likelihood of ſcandall.
Doubt not
But that I have deliverd honeſt truth,
As much as I believe, and juſtly witneſſe.
Looſe grounds to raiſe a bulwarke of reproach on,
And thus for that; my errand hither is not
In whining trewant-like ſubmiſſion,
To cry I have offended, pray forgive me,
I will doe ſo no more: but to proclaime
The power of vertue, whoſe commanding ſoveraignty,
Sets bounds to rebell-bloods, and checke reſtraines,
Cuſtome of folly by example teaches
A rule to reformation; by rewards,
Crownes worthy actions, and invites to honour ▪
Honour and worthy actions, beſt beſeeme
Their lips who practice both, and not diſcourſe 'em.
Peace, peace, man, I am ſilent.
Some there are,
And they not few in number, who reſolve
No beauty can be chaſte, leſſe unattempted;
And for becauſe the liberty of courtſhip
Flies from the wanton, on the her comes next.,
Meeting oft times, too many ſoon ſeduced,
Conclude, all may be won by gifts, by ſervice,
Or complements of vowes; and with this file
I ſtood in ranke, conqueſt ſecurd my confidence,
Spinella (ſtorme not Auria ) was an object
Of ſtudy for fruition; here I angled
Not doubting the deceipt could finde reſiſtance.
After confeſſion followes—
Noyſe obſerve him.
Oh ſtrange: by all the comforts of my hopes
I found a woman good; a woman good,
Yet as I wiſh beliefe, or doe deſire
A memorable mention, ſo much majeſty
Of humbleneſſe, and ſcorne, appeard at once
In faire, in chaſt, in wiſe Spinellas eyes,
That I grew dull in utterance, and one frowne
From her, could every flame of ſenſuall appetite.
On ſir and doe not ſtop.
Without proteſts,
I pleaded meerely love, uſd not a ſillable,
But what a virgin might without a bluſh,
Have liſtned to, and not well arm'd have pittied,
But ſhe neglecting, cry'd come Auria, come
Fight for • hy wife at home, then in ruſhd you ſir
Talkd in much fury, parted, when as ſoone
The Lady vaniſhd, after her the reſt.
What followd?
My commiſſion on mine errour,
In execution whereof I have prov'd
So punctually ſevere, that I renounce
All memory, not to this one fault alone
But to my other greater, and more irkſome,
Now he who ever ownes a name, that conſters
This repetition, the report of feare.
Of falſhood, or impoſture, let him tell me
I give my ſelfe the lye, and I will cleare
The injury, and man to man, or if
Such juſtice may prove doubtfull, two to two,
Or three to three, or any way reprieve
Th' opinion of my forfeit, without blemiſh.
Who can you thinke I am? did you expect
So great a tameneſſe as you finde, Adurni,
That you caſt lowd defiance? ſay—
I have rob'd you
Of rigor (Auria) by my ſtrict ſelf-penance,
For the preſumption.
Sure Italians hardly
Admit diſpute in queſtions of this nature,
The tricke is new.
I finde my abſolution,
By vowes of change from all ignoble practice.
Why looke ye frind, I tould you this before
You would not be perſwaded,—let me thinke.
You doe not yet deny that you ſolicited
The Lady to ill purpoſe.
I have anſwerd,
But it returnd much quiet to my minde,
Perplext with rare commotions.
Thats the way
It ſmoothes all rubs.
My Lord.
Foh I am thinking
You may talke forward, if it take tis cleare
And then and then, and ſo and ſo.
You labour with curious engins ſure ▪
Fine ones, I take ye
To be a man of credit—elſe,
Suſpition is needleſſe, know me better.
Yet you muſt not part from me ſir.
For that your pleaſure.
Come fight for thy wife at home my Auria —yes
We can fight my Spinella, when thine honor
Relies upon a Champion—now.
My Lord
Caſtanna with her ſiſter, and Malfato
Are newly enterd.
Be not lowd ▪ convey them
Into the gallery— Aurelio, friend
Adurni Lord, we three will ſit in counſell
And peece a hearty league, or ſcuffle ſhrewdly.
RUffan out of my doores, thou comſt to rob me,
An officer, what ho! my houſe is haunted
By a lewd packe of theeves, of harlots, murtherers,
Rogues, vagabonds, I foſter a decoy here,
And ſhe trowles on her ragged cuſtomer,
To cut my throat for pillage.
Good ſir heare me,
Heare or not heare ▪ let him rave his lungs out,
Whiles this woman hath abode under this roofe,
I will juſtifie my ſelfe her bedfellow in deſpight
Of deniall, in deſpight, thoſe are my words.
Monſtrous! why ſirrah, do I keepe a bawdy-houſe,
An hoſpitall for panders? Oh'; thou monſter,
Thou ſhe-confuſion! are you growne ſo rampant,
That from a privat wanton thou proclaimſt thy ſelfe
A baggage for all gameſters, Lords or Gentlemen,
Strangers, or home-ſpun yeomen, foot-poſts, pages,
Rorers or hangmen, hey day, ſet up ſhop,
And then cry a market open, toot, and welcome.
This is my husband.
Husband!
Husband naturall, I have married her,
And whats your verdict on the match ſignior?
Husband, and married her!
Indeed tis truth.
A proper joyning, give ye joy great miſtreſſe
Your fortunes are advanc'd, marry are they,
What joynture is aſſur'd pray? ſome three thouſand
A yeare in oathes and vermine? faire preferment.
Was ever ſuch a tatterd ragge of mans fleſh,
Patch'd up for Copeſmate to my Neeces daughter.
Sir,
for my mothers name forbeare this anger,
If I have yoak'd my ſelfe beneath your wiſhes,
Yet is my choyce a lawfull one, and I
Will live as truly chaſte unto his boſome,
As ere my faith hath bound me.
A ſweet couple.
We are ſo, for mine owne part, however my out-ſide
Appeare ungay, I have wraſtled with death,
Signior Martino, to preſerve your ſleepes, and ſuch
As you are untroubled, a ſouldier is in peace
A mockery, a very towne-bull for laughter, unthrifts,
And landed babies, are prey-curmudgeons,
Lay their baits for, let the warres rattle about
Your eares once, and the ſecuritie of a ſouldier is
Right honourable amongſt yee then, that day
May ſhine againe: ſo to my buſineſſe.
A ſouldier! thou a ſouldier, I doe believe
Th'art lowfre; that's a pretty ſigne I grant:
A villanous poore Bandetti rather, one
Can man a queane, and cant, and pick a pocket ▪
Pad for a cloake, or hat, and in the darke
Piſtoll a ſtragler for a quarter Duca • e.
A ſouldier! yes, a lookes as if a had not
The ſpirit of a herring, or a tumbler.
Let age and dotage rage together, Levidolche thou art mine, on what conditions the world ſhall ſoone witneſſe: yet ſince our hands joyn'd, I have not intereſſed my poſſeſſion of thy bed, nor till I have accounted to thy injunction, doe I meane: kiſſe mee quick and reſolute. So adieu Signior.
Deare, for loves ſake, ſtay.
Forbeare intreaties. Exit.
Ah thou: but what? I know not how to call thee,
Faine would I ſmother griefe, and out it muſt ▪
My heart is broke, thou haſt for many a day
Been at a loſſe, and now art loſt for ever:
Loſt, loſt, without recovery.
With pardon,
Let me retaine your ſorrowes.
Tis impoſſible,
Deſpaire of riſing up to honeſt fame,
Turnes all the courſes wilde, and this laſt action
Will roare thy infamie, then you are certainly
Married forſooth, unto this new-come.
Yes, and herein every hope is brought to life,
Which long hath laine in deadneſſe ▪ I have once more
Wedded Benatzi my divorced husband,
Benatzi, this the man?
No odde diſguiſe
Could guard him from diſcoverie; tis he,
The choyce of my ambition, heaven preſerve me
Thankfull for ſuch a bounty; yet he dreames not
Of this deceit, but let me die in ſpeaking,
If I repute not my ſucceſſe more happy
Then any earthly bleſſing; oh ſweet uncle,
Rejoyce with me, I am a faithfull convert,
And will redeeme the ſtains of a foule name,
By love and true obedience.
Force of paſſion
Shewes me a childe againe, doe Levidolche,
Performe thy reſolutions, thoſe perform'd,
I have been onely ſteward for your welfare,
You ſhall have all between yee.
Joyne with me ſir,
Our plot requires much ſpeed ▪ we muſt be earneſt,
Ile tell yee what conditions threaten danger,
Unleſſe you intermediate; let us haſten,
For feare we come too late.
As thou intendeſt
A vertuous honeſtie, I am thy ſecond
To any office, Levidolche wittie,
My Neece, my wittie Neece.
Let's ſlack no time ſir. Exeunt.
Kinſman and Ladies, have a little patience ▪
All will be as you wiſh, Ile be your warrant,
Feare nothing, Augia is a nobe fellow,
I leave yee; but be ſure I am in hearing:
Take courage. Exit.
Courage, they who have no hearts,
Finde none to loſe; ours is as great as his,
Who defie danger moſt ▪ ſure ſtate and ceremonie
In habit here like ſtrangers we ſhall wait
Formalitie of entertainment, Couſen,
Let us returne, 'tis paultry.
Gentle ſir, Enter Auria, and Aurelio.
Contine your paſſion, my attendance onely
Commends a dutie.
Now for heavens ſake ſiſter—
A' comes, your husband comes, take comfort ſiſter
Malfato.
Auria.
Coſen, would mine armes
In their embraces might at once deliver
Affectionately what intereſt your merit
Holds in my eſtimation, I may chide
The coyneſſe of this intercourſe betwixt us,
Which a retir'd privacle on your part
Hath pleaſ'd to ſhew; if ought of my endevours
Can purchaſe kinde opinion, I ſhall honour
The meanes and practice.
Tis your charitie.
VVorthy Malfato.
Provident Aurelio.
Caſtanna, vertuous mayd,
Your ſervant, brother.
But who's that other, ſuch a face mine eyes
Have been acquainted with, the fight reſembles
Something which is not quite loſt to remembrance;
VVhy do's the Lady kneele? to whom? pray riſe;
I ſhall forget civilitie of manners,
Imagining you tender, a falſe tribute,
Or him to whom you tender 〈◊〉 counterfeit.
My Lord, you uſe a borrowd bravery,
Not ſuiting faire conſtructions, may your fort unes
Mount higher than can apprehenſion reach 'em,
Yet this waſte kinde of antique ſoveraign 〈◊〉
Unto a wife who equals every beſt
Of your deſerts, archievements, or poſteritie,
Bewrayes a barrenneſſe of noble nature,
Let upſtarts exerciſe uncomely roughneſſe,
Cleare ſpirits to the humble will be humble:
You know your wife no doubt.
Cry ye mercie Gentleman,
Belike you come to tutour a good carriage,
Are expert in the nicke ont, we ſhall ſtudy
Inſtructions quiently, wife you ſayd, agreed.
Keepe faire, and ſtand the triall.
Thoſe words raiſe
A lively ſoule in her, who almoſt yeelded
To faintneſſe and ſtupiditie, I thanke yee,
Tho prove what judge you will, till I can purge
Objections which require beliefe and conſcience,
I have no kindred ſiſter, husband, friend,
Or pittie for my plea.
Call ye this welcom? we are miſtook Caſtanna.
Oh my Lord, other reſpects were promiſed.
Said yee Lady,
No kindred, ſiſter, husband, friend.
Nor name,
With this addition, I diſclaime all benefit
Of mercie from a charitable thought,
If one or all the ſubtilties of malice,
If any enginiere of faithleſſe diſcord,
If ſuppoſition for pretence in folly,
Can poynt out, without injurie to goodneſſe,
A likelihood of guilt in my behaviour,
Which may declare neglect in every dutie,
Requir'd fit, or exacted.
High and peremptory,
The confidence is maſculine.
Why not, an honourable cauſe gives life to truth,
Without controll.
I can proceed, that tongue,
Whoſe venome by traducing ſpotleſſe honour,
Hath ſpread, th'infection is not more mine enemie,
Then theirs, or his weake and beſotted braines are,
On whom the poyſon of its cankred falſhood
Hath wrought for credit to ſo foule a miſchiefe.
Speake ſir, the churliſh voyce of this combuſtion,
Aurelio ſpeake, nor (gentle ſir) forbeare
Ought what you know, but roundly uſe your eloquence
Againſt a meane defendant.
Hee's put too't,
It ſeemes the challenge gravels him ▪
My intelligence,
Was iſſue of my doubts, not of my knowledge.
A ſelfe confeſſion may crave aſſiſtance,
Let the Ladies juſtice impoſe the penance.
So in the rules of friendſhip, as of love,
Suſpition is not ſeldome an improper
Advantage for the knitting faſter joynts
Of faithfulleſt affection by the fevers
Of caſualtie unlooſd, where laſtly errour
Hath run into the toyle.
Wofull ſatis faction for a divorce of hearts.
So reſolute,
I ſhall touch nearer home, behold theſe haires,
(Great Miſters of a ſpirit) yet they are not
By winter of old age quite hid in ſnow,
Some meſſengers of time I muſt acknowledge
Amongſt them tooke up lodging, when we firſt
Exchang'd our faiths in wedlock, I was proud,
I did prevaile with one whoſe youth and beauty
Deſerv'd a choyce more ſutable in both.
Advancement to a fortune could not court,
Ambition either on my ſide, or hers:
Love drove the bargaine, and the truth of love
Confirm'd it, I conceiv'd, but diſproportion
In yeares, amongſt the married, is a reaſon
For change of pleaſures, whereto I reply
Our union was not forc'd, 'twas by conſent;
So then the breach in ſuch a caſe appeares
Unpardonable; ſay your thoughts.
My thoughts in that reſpect are as reſolute as yours,
The ſame, yet herein evidence of frailtie
Deſerv'd not more a ſeparation,
Then doth charge of diſloyaltie objected
Without or ground or witneſſe, womans faults
Subject to puniſhments, and mens applauded,
Preſcribe no lawes in force.
Are ye ſo nimble.
A ſoul ſublim'd from droſſe by competition,
Such is mighty Aurias fam'd; deſcends
From its owne Spheare, when injuries profound ones
Yeeld to the combat of a ſcoulding maſterie.
Skirmiſh of words hath with your wife lewdly rang'd
Adulterating the honour of your bed.
Hold diſpute, but execute your vengeance,
With unreſiſted rage we ſhall looke on,
Allow the fact, and ſpurne her from our blouds,
Elſe not detected, you have wrong'd her innocence
Unworthily, and childiſhly, for which
I challenge ſatisfaction.
Tis a tyranny
Over an humble and obedient ſweetneſſe,
Ungently to inſult—
That I make good,
And muſt without exception finde admittance
Fitting the party who hath herin intereſt,
Put caſe I was in fault, that fault ſtretch'd meerely
To a miſguided thought, and who in preſence
Except the paire of ſiſters faire and matchleſſe,
Can quit an imputation of like folly?
Here I aske pardon (excellent Spinella
Of only you) that granted he amongſt you,
VVho calles an even reckoning, ſhall meet
An even accountant.
Baited by conſederacie,
I muſt have right.
And I, my Lord, my Lord,
What ſtirre and coyle is here? you can ſuſpect,
So reconciliation then is needleſſe,
Conclude the difference by revenge, or part,
And never more ſee one another: ſiſter,
Lend me thine arme, I have aſſum'd a courage
Above my force, and can hold out no longer,
Auria unkinde, unkinde.
She faints.
Spinella, regent of my affections, thou haſt conquerd,
I finde thy vertues as I left them, perfect,
Pure, and unflaw'd, for inſtance let me claime
Caſtannas promiſe.
Mine?
Yours, to whoſe faith
I am a guardian, not by impoſition,
But by you choſen, looke yee, I have fitted
A husband for you, noble and deſerving,
No ſhrinking backe, Adurni I preſent her
A wife of worth.
Howes that?
So great a bleſſing
Crownes all deſires of life, the motion, Lady,
To me, I can aſſure you, is not ſudden,
But welcom'd & forethought, would you could pleaſe
To ſay the like.
Caſtanna doe—Speake deereſt,
It rectifies all crookes, vaine ſurmiſes,
I prethee ſpeake.
The courtſhip's ſomewhat quick,
The match it ſeemes agreed on, doe not ſiſter
Reject the uſe of fate.
I dare not queſtion
The will of heaven.
Vnthought of and unlookt for.
My ever honored Lord.
This marriage frees
Each circumſtance of jealouſie.
Make no ſcruple
(Caſtanna) of the choyce, tis firme and reall,
Why elſe have I ſo long with tameneſſe nouriſht
Report of wrongs, but that I fixt on iſſue
Of my deſires, Italians uſe not dalliance
But execution; herein I degenerated
From cuſtome of our nation: for the vertues
Of my Spinella rooted in my ſoule,
Yet common forme of matrimoniall complements,
Short liv'd, as are their pleaſures, yet in ſooth,
My deareſt, I might blame your cauſeleſſe abſence,
To whom my love and nature were no ſtrangers,
But being in your kinſmans houſe, I honour
His hoſpitable friendſhip, and muſt thank it.
Now laſting truce on all hands.
You will pardon
A raſh and over-buſie curioſitie.
It was too blame, but the ſucceſſe remits it.
Sir, what preſumptions formerly have grounded
Opinion of unfitting carriage to you,
On my part I ſhall faithfully acquite
At eaſie ſummons.
You prevent the nicetie,
Uſe your owne pleaſure—
Whats the matter?
Matter?
Adurni and Malfato found together!
Now for a glorious vengeance.
Hold, oh hold him.
This is no place for murder, yeeld thy ſword.
Yeeld it, or force it; ſet you up your ſhambles
Of ſlaughter in my preſence.
Let him come.
VVhat can the Ruſſian meane?
I am prevented.
The temple or the chamber of the Duke,
Had elſe not prov'd a ſanctuarie Lord,
Thou haſt diſhonourably wrong'd my wife.
Thy wife! I know not her, nor thee.
Feare nothing.
Yes, me you know, heaven has a gentle mercle
For penitent offenders: bleſſed Ladies,
Repute me not a caſt-away, though once
I fell into ſome lapſes, which our ſex
Are oft inntangled by; yet what I have been,
Concernes me now no more, who am reſolv'd
On a new life. This Gentleman Benatzi,
Diſguiſed as you ſee, I have re-married,
I knew you at firſt ſight, and tender conſtantly
Submiſſion for all errours.
Nay, tis true ſir.
I joy in the diſcovery, am thankfull
Vnto the change.
Let wonder hence forth ceaſe,
For I am partner with Benatzis counſ • ls;
And in them was director, I have ſeene
The man doe ſervice in the warres late paſt,
VVorthy an ample mention; but of that
At large hereafter, repetitions now
Of good or bad, would ſtreighten time preſented
For other uſe.
VVelcome, and welcome ever.
Mine eyes ſir, never ſhall without a bluſh
Receive a looke from yours; pleaſe to forget
All paſſages of raſhneſſe, ſuch attempt
VVas mine, and onely mine.
You have found a way
To happineſſe, I honour the converſion,
Then I am freed.
may ſtile your friend your ſervant,
Now all thats mine, is theirs,
But let me adde
An offering to the altar of this peace.
How likes Spinella this? our holy day
Deſerves the Kalender.
This Gentlewoman
Reform'd muſt in my thoughts live faire and worthy,
Indeed you ſhal.
And mine, the noveltie
Requires a friendly love.
You are kinde and bountifull.
By your leaves Lords and Ladies, to your jollities,
I bring increaſe with mine too, here's a yongſter
Whom I cll ſonne-in-law, for ſo my daughter
Will have it.
Yeth in ſooth thee will.
Futelli hath wean'd her from this paine.
Stand forth ſtout lovers.
Top & Top-gallant paire, and for his pains,
She will have him, or none, hee's not the richeſt
I'th pariſh; but a wit, I ſay Amen,
Becauſe I cannot helpe it.
Tith no matter.
Wee'l remedy the penury of Fortune,
They ſhall with us to Corſica, our couſin
Muſt not deſpaire of means, ſince tis believ'd
Futelli can deſerve a place of truſt.
You are in all unfellowed,
Withly thpoken.
Thinke on Piero ſir.
Piero, yes,
But what of theſe two pretty ones?
Ile follow.
The Ladies, play at cards, make ſport and whiſtle,
My purſe ſhall beare me out, a lazie life,
Is ſcirvy, and deboſhd; fight you abroad,
And weele be game whiles you fight at home,
Runne high, runne low, here is a braine can doo • ,
But for my martiall brother Don, prithee make him
A what dee callt, a ſetting dog, a centinell
Ile mend his weekely pay.
Hee ſhall deſerve it.
Vouchſafe employment honourable
Marry.
The Dons a generous Don.
Unfit to looſe him,
Command doth limit us ſhort time for revells,
Wee muſt be thrifty in them, none I truſt,
Repines at theſe delights, they are free and harmeleſſe,
After diſtreſſe at ſea, the dangers ore,
Safety and welcomes better taſte a ſhore.
THe Court's on riſing; tis too late
To wiſh the Lady in her fate
Of try all now more fortunate.
A verdict in the Iuries breſt,
Will be given up anon at leaſt,
Till then tis fit we hope the beſt.
Elſe if there can be any ſtay,
Next ſitting without more delay,
We will expect a gentle day.