THE LOVERS Melancholy.
ACTED AT THE PRIVATE HOVSE IN THE BLACKE Friers, and publikely at the Globe by the Kings Maiesties Ser uants.
LONDON, Printed for H. Seile, and are to be sold at the Ty gers head in Saint Pauls Church-yard. 1629.
THe account of some leisurable houres, is here summ'd vp, and offered to exa mination. Importunity of Others, or Opinion of mine owne, hath not vrg'd on any confidence of running the hazard of a censure. As plurali ty hath reference to a Multitude, so, I care not to please Many: but wh • re there is a Parity of condition, there the freedom of constructi on, makes the best musicks. This concord hath equally held betweene YOV THE PATRONES, and ME THE PRESENTOR. I am cleer'd of all scruple of dis-respect on your parts; as I am of too slacke a Merit in my selfe. My presumption of comming in Print in this kind, hath hitherto been vn-reprooueable. This Piece, being the first, that euer courted Reader; and it is very possible, that the like complement with Me, may soone grow out of fashion. A practice of which that I may auoid now, I commend to the continuance of your Loues, the memory of HIS, who without the protestation of a seruice, is readily your Friend,
IF that thou think'st these lines thy worth can raise,
Thou do'st mistake: my liking is no prayse:
Nor can I thinke thy Iudgement is so ill,
To seeke for Bayes from such a barraine Quill:
Let your true Critick, that can iudge and mend,
Allow thy Sceanes and Stile: I, as a friend
That knowes thy worth, doe onely sticke my Name,
To shew my Loue, not to aduance thy Fame.
I Write not to thy Play: Ile not begin
To throw a censure vpon what hath been
By th' Best approu'd; It can nor feare, nor want
The Rage, or Liking of the Ignorant.
Nor seeke I Fame for Thee, when thine owne Pen
Hath forc'd a praise long since, from knowing Men.
I speake my thoughts, and wish vnto the Stage
A glory from thy studies; that the Age
May be indebted to Thee, for Reprieue
Of purer language, and that Spight may grieue
To see It selfe out-done. When Thou art read,
The Theater may hope Arts are not dead,
Though long conceal'd; that Poet-Apes may feare
To vent their weaknesse, mend, or quite forbeare.
This I dare promise; and keepe this in store;
As thou hast done enough, Thou canst doe more.
BLacke choler, Reasons ouer-flowing Spring,
Where thirsty Louers drinke, or any Thing,
Passion, the restlesse current of dull plaints
Affords their thoughts, who deeme lost beauties, Saints:
Here their best Lectur • s read, collect, and see
Various conditions of Humanitie
Highly enlighten'd by thy Muses rage;
Yet all so coucht, that they adorn'd the Stage.
Shun Phocions blushes thou; for sure to please
It is no sinne, then what is thy disease?
Iudgements applause? effeminated smiles?
Studie's delight? thy wit mistrust beguiles:
Establisht Fame will thy Physicion be,
(Write but againe) to cure thy Iealousie.
TIs not the Language, nor the fore-plac'd Rimes
Of Friends, that shall commend to after-times
The Louers Melancholy: Its owne worth
Without a borrowed prayse, shall set it forth.
TO tell yee (Gentlemen) in what true sense
The Writer, Actors, or the audience
Should mold their Iudgeme ̄ ts for a Play, might draw
Truth into Rules, but we haue no such law.
Our Writer, for himselfe would haue yee know,
That in his following Sceanes, he doth not owe
To others Fancies, nor hath layne in wait
For any stolne Inuention, from whose height
He might commend his owne, more then the right
A Scholer claimes, may warrant for delight.
It is Arts scorne, that some of late haue made
The Noble vse of Poetry a Trade.
For your parts (Gentlemen) to quite his paines,
Yet you will please, that as you meet with straines
Of lighter mixtures, but to cast your eye
Rather vpon the maine, then on the bye.
His hopes stand firme, and we shall find it true,
The Louers Melancholy cur'd by you.
DAngers? How meane you dangers? that so courtly
You gratulate my safe returne from dan gers?
From Trauailes (noble Sir.)
These are delights,
If my experience hath not Trewant-like
Mis-spent the time, which I haue stroue to vse,
For bettering my mind with obseruation.
As I am modest, I protest 'tis strange:
But is it possible?
What?
To bestride
The frothy fomes of Neptunes surging waues,
When blustring Boreas tosseth vp the deepe,
And thumps a thunder bounce?
Sweet Sir, 'tis nothing,
Straight comes a Dolphin playing neere your ship,
Heauing his crooked backe vp, and presents
A Feather-bed, to waft'ee to the shoare,
As easily as if you slepti'th' Court.
Indeed, is't true, I pray?
I will not stretch
Where didst thou learne this language?
I this language?
Alas, Sir, we that study words and formes
Of complement, must fashion all discourse,
According to the nature of the subiect.
But I am silent, now appeares a Sunne,
Whose shadow I adore.
My honour'd Father.
From mine eyes, son, son of my care, my loue,
The ioyes that bid thee welcome, doe too much speake me a child.
O Princely Sir, your hand.
Performe your duties where you owe them first,
I dare not be so sudden in the pleasures,
Thy presence hath brought home.
Here thou still findest
A Friend as noble ( Menaphon ) as when
Thou left'st at thy departure.
Yes, I know it,
To him I owe more seruice.—
Pray giue leaue,
He shall attend your intertainements soone,
Next day, and next day, for an houre or two,
I would engrosse him onely.
Noble Lord.
Y'are both dismist.
Your creature, and your Seruant.
Giue me thy hand, I will not say, Th'art wel come,
That is the common roade of co ̄ mon friends,
I am glad I haue thee here—O, I want words
To let thee know my heart.
'Tis peec'd to mine.
Yes, 'tis, as firmely, as that holy thing
Call'd Friendship can vnite it. Menaphon,
My Menaphon: now all the goodly blessings,
That can create a Heauen on earth, dwell with thee.
Twelue monthes we haue been sundred, but henceforth
We neuer more will part, till that sad houre,
In which death leaues the one of vs behind,
To see the others funerals perform'd.
Let's now a while be free. How haue thy trauailes
Disburth'ned thee abroad of discontents?
Such cure as sicke men find in changing beds,
I found in change of Ayres; the fancy flatter'd
My hopes with ease, as theirs doe, but the griefe
Is still the same.
Such is my case at home.
Cleophyla, thy Kinswoman, that Maide
Of sweetnesse and humility, more pities
Her Fathers poore afflictions, then the tide
Of my complaints.
Thamasta, my great Mistris,
Your Princely Sister, hath, I hope ere this,
Confirm'd affection on some worthy choice.
Not any, Menaphon. Her bosome yet
Is intermur'd with Ice, though by the truth
Of loue, no day hath euer past, wherein
I haue not mention'd thy deserts, thy constancy
Thy—Come, in troth I dare not tell thee what,
Lest thou mightst thinke I fawnd vpon a sinne
Friendship was neuer guilty of; for flattery
Is monstrous in a true friend.
Does the Court
Weare the old lookes too?
If thou mean'st the Prince,
It does, hee's the same melancholy man,
He was at's Fathers death, sometimes speakes sence,
But seldome mirth; will smile, but seldome laugh;
Will lend an eare to businesse, deale in none;
Gaze vpon Reuels, Anticke Fopperies,
But is not mou'd; will sparingly discourse,
Heare musicke; but what most he takes delight in,
Are handsome pictures; one so young, and goodly,
So sweet in his owne nature, any Story
Hath seldome mentioned.
Why should such as I am,
Groane vnder the light burthens of small sorrowes,
When as a Prince, so potent, cannot shun
Motions of passion? To be man (my Lord)
Is to be but the exercise of cares
In seuerall shapes; as miseries doe grow,
They alter as mens formes; but how, none know.
This little Ile of Cyprus sure abounds
In greater wonders, both for change and fortune,
Then any you haue seene abroad.
Then any
I haue obseru'd abroad: all Countries else
To a free eye and mind yeeld something rare;
And I for my part, haue brought home one Iewell.
Of admirable value.
Iewell, Menaphon?
A Iewell, my Amethus, a faire Youth;
A Youth, whom if I were but superstitious,
I should repute an Excellence more high,
Then meere creations are, to adde delight.
I'le tell yee how I found him.
Prethee doe.
Passing from Italy to Greece, the Tales
Which Poets of an elder time haue fain'd
To glorifie their Tempe, bred in me
Desire of visiting that Paradise.
To Thessaly I came, and liuing priuate,
Without acquaintance of more sweet companions ▪
Then the old In-mates to my loue, my thoughts;
I day by day frequented silent Groues,
And solitarie Walkes. Vide Fami stradam. lib. 2. Prolas. 6. Acad. 3. Imitat. Clau dian. One morning early
This accident incountred me: I heard
The sweetest and most rauishing contention,
That Art or Nature euer were at strife in.
I cannot yet conceiue, what you inferre
By Art and Nature.
I shall soone resolue yee.
A sound of musicke toucht mine eares, or rather
Indeed intranc'd my soule: as I stole neerer,
Inuited by the melody, I saw
This Youth, this faire-fac'd Youth, vpon his Lute
With straines of strange variety and harmony,
Proclaiming (as it seem'd) so bold a challenge
To the cleare Quiristers of the Woods, the Birds,
That as they flockt about him, all stood silent,
Wondring at what they heard. I wondred too.
And so doe I, good,—on.
A Nightingale.
Natures best skill'd Musicion vndertakes
The challenge, and for euery seuerall straine
The wel-shapt Youth could touch, she sung her down;
He coo'd not run D • uision with more Art
Vpon his quaking Instrument, then she,
The Nightingale did with her various notes
Reply too, for a voyce, and for a sound,
Amethus, tis much easier to beleeue
That such they were, then hope to heare againe.
How did the Riuals part?
You terme them rightly,
For they were Riuals, and their Mistris harmony.
Some time thus spent, the young man grew at last
Into a pretty anger, that a bird
Whom Art had neuer taught Cliffs, Moods, or Notes,
Should vie with him for mastery, whose study
Had busied many houres to perfit practise:
To end the controuersie, in a rapture,
Vpon his Instrument he playes so swiftly,
So many voluntaries, and so quicke,
That there was curiositie and cunning,
Concord in discord, lines of diffring method
Meeting in one full Center of delight.
Now for the bird.
The bird ordain'd to be
Musicks first Martyr, stroue to imitate
These seuerall sounds: which, when her warbling throat
Fail'd in, for griefe, downe dropt she on his Lute,
And brake her heart; it was the quaintest sadnesse,
To see the Conquerour vpon her Hearse,
To weepe a funerall Elegy of teares,
That trust me (my Amethus ) I coo'd chide
Mine owne vnmanly weakenesse, that made me
A fellow-mourner with him. Amet. I beleeue thee.
He lookes vpon the trophies of his Art,
Then sigh'd, then wip'd his eyes, then sigh'd, and cride,
Alas poore creature: I will soone reuenge
This cruelty vpon the Author of it;
Henceforth this Lute guilty of innocent blood,
Shall neuer more betray a harmelesse peace
To an vntimely end: and in that sorrow,
As he was pashing it against a tree,
I suddenly stept in.
Thou hast discourst
A truth of mirth and pitie.
I reprieu'd
Th'intended execution with intreaties,
And interruption: but (my Princely friend)
It was not strange, the musicke of his hand
Did ouer-match birds, when his voyce and beauty,
Youth, carriage and discretion, must, from men
Indu'd with reason, rauish admiration:
From me they did.
But is this miracle
Not to be seene?
I won him by degrees
To chuse me his Companion whence he is,
Or who, as I durst modestly inquire,
So gently hee would woo not to make knowne:
Onely for reasons to himselfe reseru'd,
He told me, that some remnant of his life
Was to be spent in Trauaile; for his fortunes,
They were nor meane, nor riotous, his friends
Not publisht to the world, though not obscure:
His Countrey, Athens; and his name, Parthenophill.
Came he with you to Cyprus?
Willingly.
The same of our young melancholy Prince,
Meleanders rare distractions, the obedience
Of young Cle • phila, Thamasta's glory,
Your matchlesse friendship, and my desperate loue
Preuail'd with him, and I haue lodg'd him priuately
In Famagosta.
Now th'art doubly welcome:
I will not lose the sight of such a rarity
For one part of my hopes. When d'ee intend
To visit my great-spirited Sister.
May I
Without offence?
Without offence? Parthenophill
Shall find a worthy intertainement too.
Thou art not still a coward.
Shee's too excellent,
And I too low in merit.
Ile prepare
A noble welcome. And (friend) ere we part,
Vnloade to thee an ouer-charged heart.
I will not court the madnesse of the times,
Nor fawne vpon the Riots that embalme
Our wanton Gentry, to preserue the dust
Of their affected vanities in coffins
Of memorable • hame ▪ when Common-wealths
Totter and reele from that nobilitie
And ancient vertue, which renownes the great,
Who steere the Helme of gouernment, while Mush rooms
Grow vp, & make new lawes to licence folly:
Why should not I, a May-game, scorne the weight
Of my sunke fortunes? snarle at the vices
Which rot the Land, and without feare or wit
Be mine owne Anticke? Tis a sport to liue
When life is irkesome, if we will not hug
Prosperity in others, and contemne
Affliction in our selues. This Rule is certaine,
" He that pursues his safety from the Schoole
" Of State, must learne to be mad man, or foole.
Ambition, wealth, ease, I renounce the diuell
That damns yee here on earth, or I will be—
Mine owne mirth, or mine owne tormentor,—So,
Here comes intelligence, a Buz o'the Court.
Rhetias, I sought thee out to tell thee newes,
New, excellent new newes. Cucolus, Sirra,
That Gull, that young old Gull, is comming this way.
And thou art his forerunner?
Prethee heare me:
In stead of a fine guarded Page,
We haue got him
A Boy, trickt vp in neat and handsome
Fashion;
Perswaded him, that tis indeed a Wench;
And he has entertain'd him, he does follow him,
Carries his sword and buckler, waits on his trencher,
Filles him his Wine, Tobacco, whets his knife,
Lackeyes his letters, does what seruice else
He would imploy his man in: being askt,
Why he is so irregular in Courtship?
His answer is, that since great Ladies vse
Gentlemen Vshers to goe bare before them,
He knowes no reason, but he may reduce
The Courtiers to haue women waite on them,
And he begins the fashion; he is laught at
Most complementally. Thou't burst to see him.
Agelastus, so surnamed for his grauity,
Was a very wise fellow, kept his countenance
All dayes of his life as demurely, as a Iudge that
Pronounceth sentence of death, on a poore Roague,
For stealing as much bacon, as would serue at a meale
With a Calues head. Yet he smil'd once,
And neuer but once: Thou art no Scholler?
I haue read Pamphlets dedicated to me:
Dost call him Agelastus ? why did he laugh?
To see an Asse eate Thistles.
Puppy, go study to be a singular Coxcomb. Cuculus is an
Ordinary Ape, but thou art an Ape of an Ape.
Thou hast a Patent to abuse thy friends:
Looke, looke, he comes, obserue him seriously.
Reach me my sword and buckler.
They are here, forsooth.
How now ( Minkes ) how now? Where is your duty, your distance?
Let me haue seruice methodically tendred; you are now One of vs. Your cursey; good: remember that you are To practise Courtship ▪ was thy father a Piper, saist thou?
A sounder of some such wind instrume ̄ t forsooth.
Was he so? hold vp thy head; be thou musicall
To me, and I will marry thee to a dancer: one
That shall ryde on his Foot-cloth, and maintaine thee
In thy Muffe and Hood.
That will be fine indeed.
That art yet but simple.
Dee thinke so?
I haue a braine; I haue a head-piece;
O my conscience, if I take paines with thee, I shood
Raise thy vnderstanding (Girle) to the height of a nurse,
Or a Court-midwife at least, I will make thee big
In time, wench.
E'en doe your pleasure with me, Sir.
Noble accomplisht Cuculus.
Giue me thy fist, Innocent.
Would 'twere in thy belly, there tis.
That's well, hee's an honest blade, though he be blunt.
Who cares? we can be as blunt as he for's life.
Cuculus, there is within a mile or two, a Sow-pig
Hath suckt a Brach, and now hunts the Deere, the Hare,
Nay, most vnnaturally the wilde Bore,
Aswell as any Hound in Cyprus.
Monstrous Sow-pig! ist true?
Ile be at charge of a banket on thee for a sight of her.
Euery thing takes after the dam that gaue it suck:
Where hadst thou thy milke?
I? Why, my nurses husband was a most ex cellent maker
Of Shittle-cocks.
My nurse was a woman-surgeon.
And who gaue thee pap, Mouse?
I neuer suckt that I remember.
La now, a Shittle-cock-maker, all thy braines are stucke with corke and feather. Cuculus, this lear ned Courtier takes after the nurse too, a she-surgeon, which is in effect a meere matter of colours. Goe, learne to paint and dawbe complements, tis the next step to run into a new suit; my Lady Periwinckle here neuer suckt; suck thy Master, and bring forth Moone calues, Fop, doe; This is good Philosophy, Sirs, make vse on't.
Blesse vs, what a strange Creature this is?
A Gull, an arrant Gull by Proclamation.
Corax, the Princes chiefe Physicion;
What businesse speeds his haste—
Are all things well, Sir?
Yes, yes, yes.
Phew, you may wheele about, man, wee know y'are proud of your slouenry and practice, tis your ver tue; the Princes melancholy fit I presume holds still.
So doe thy knauery and desperate beggery.
Aha: here's one will tickle the ban-dog.
You must not goe yet.
Ile stay in spight of thy teeth. There lyes my grauity:
Doe what thou darest, I stand thee ▪
Mountebanck, Empricks, Quacksaluers, Mi neralists, Wizards, Alchimists, cast-Apothecaries, old Wiues and Barbers, are all suppositors to the right Worshipfull Doctor, as I take it.
Some of yee are the head of your Art, & the hornes too, but they come by nature; thou liuest single for no other end, but that thou fearest to be a Cuckold.
Haue at thee; thou affect'st railing onely for thy health, thy miseries are so thicke and so lasting; that thou hast not one poore denier to bestow on opening a veine. Wherefore to auoide a Plurisie, thou't be sure to prate thy selfe once a month into a whipping, and bleed in the breech in stead of the arme.
Haue at thee agen.
Come.
There, there, there; O braue Doctor.
Let'em alone.
Thou art in thy Religion an Atheist, in thy condition a Curre, in thy dyet an Epicure, in thy lust a Goate, in thy sleepe a Hogge; thou tak'st vpon thee the habit of a graue Phisition, but art indeed an impostrous Emperike. Physicions are the bodies Coblers, rather the Botchers of mens bodies; as the one patches our tatterd clothes, so the other solders our diseased flesh. Come on.
Tot, tot, hold him tot, hold him toot, tot, tot, tot.
The best worth in thee, is the corruption of thy minde, for that onely intitles thee to the dignity of a lowse: a thing bred out of the filth and superfluity of ill humours: Thou byt'st any where; and any man who defends not himselfe with the cleane linnen of se cure honesty; him thou darest not come neere. Thou art Fortunes Ideot, Vertues Bankrupt, Times Dunghil, Manhoods Scandall, and thine owne scourge. Thou wouldst hang thy selfe, so wretchedly miserable thou art; but that no man will trust thee with as much mo ney as will buy a halter: and all thy stocke to be sold, is not worth halfe as much as may procure it.
Ha, ha, ha; this is flattery, grosse flattery.
I haue imployment for thee, and for yee all, Tut, these are but good morrowes betweene vs.
Are thy bottles full?
Of rich wine, lets all sucke together.
Like so many Swine in a trough.
Ile shape yee all for a deuise before the Prince, Wee'le trie how that can moue him.
He shall fret or laugh.
Must I make one?
Yes, and your feminine Page too.
Thankes most egregiously.
I will not slacke my part.
Wench, take my buckler.
Come all vnto my chamber, the proiect is cast,
The time onely we must attend.
The melody must agree well, and yeeld sport,
When such as these are, Knaues and Fooles consort.
Does this shew well?
What would you haue me doe?
Not like a Lady of the trim, new crept
Out of the shell of sluttish sweat and labour,
Into the glittering pompe of ease and wantonnesse,
Imbroideries, and all these antike fashions,
That shape a woman monstrous; to transforme
Your education, and a Noble birth
Into contempt and laughter. Sister, Sister,
She who deriues her blood from Princes, ought
To glorifie her greatnesse by humility.
Then you conclude me proud.
Young Menaphon,
My worthy friend, has lou'd you long, and truly,
To witnesse his obedience to your scorne,
Twelue moneths (wrong'd Gentleman) he vndertooke
A voluntary exile. Wherefore (Sister)
In this time of his absence, haue you not
Dispos'd of your affections on some Monarch?
Or sent Embassadors to some neighbouring King
With fawning protestations of your graces?
Your rare perfections, admirable beauty?
This had been a new piece of modesty,
Would haue deseru'd a Chronicle!
You are bitter;
And brother, by your leaue, not kindly wise.
My freedome is my births, I am not bound
To fancy your approuements, but my owne.
Indeed you are an humble youth, I heare of
Your visits, and your louing commendation
To your hearts Saint, Cleophila, a Virgin
Of a rare excellence: what though she want
A portion to maintaine a portly greatnesse?
Yet tis your gracious sweetnesse to descend
So low, the meeknesse of your pity leades yee.
She is your deare friends Sister, a good soule,
An Innocent.
Thamasta.
I haue giuen
Your Menaphon a welcome home as fits me;
For his sake entertain'd Parthenophill,
The handsome Stranger, more familiarly
Then (I may feare) becomes me; yet for his part,
I not repent my courtesies, but you—
No more, no more; be affable to both:
Time may reclaime your cruelty.
I pitty
The youth, and trust me (brother) loue his sadnesse:
He talkes the prettiest stories, he deliuers
His tales so gracefully, that I coo'd sit
And listen, nay forget my meales and sleepe,
To heare his neat discourses. Menaphon
Was well aduis'd in chusing such a friend,
For pleading his true loue.
Now I commend thee,
Thou't change at last, I hope.
I feare I shall.
Haue ye suruaid the Garden?
Tis a curious,
A pleasantly contriu'd delight.
Your eye (Sir)
Hath in your trauailes, often met contents
Of more variety.
Not any (Lady.)
It were impossible, since your faire presence
Makes euery place where it vouchsafes to shine,
More louely then all other helpes of Art
Can equall.
What you meane by helpes of Art,
You know your selfe best, be they as they are:
You need none I am sure to set me forth.
'Twould argue want of manners, more then skill,
Not to praise praise it selfe.
For your reward,
Henceforth Ile call you Seruant.
Excellent Sister.
'Tis my first step to honour: May I fall
Lower then shame, when I neglect all seruice
That may confirme this fauour.
Are you well, Sir?
Great Princesse, I am well, to see a League
Betweene an humble loue, such as my Friends is,
And a commanding vertue, such as yours is,
Are sure restoratiues.
You speake ingeniously.
Brother, he pleas'd to shew the Gallery
To this young stranger, vse the time a while,
And we will altogether to the Court.
I will present yee (Sir) vnto the Prince.
Y'are all compos'd of fairenesse, and true bounty.
Come, come, wee'l wait thee, Sister: this begin ning
Doth rellish happy processe.
You haue blest me.
Kala, O Kala,
Lady.
We are priuate, thou art my Closet.
Locke your secrets close then:
I am not to be forc'd.
Neuer till now,
Coo'd I be sensible of being traytor
To honour and to shame.
You are in loue.
I am growne base— Parthenophill —
Hee's handsome,
Richly indow'd; he hath a louely face,
A winning tongue.
If euer I must fall,
In him my greatnesse sinkes. Loue is a Tyrant
Resisted; whisper in his eare, how gladly
I would steale time, to talke with him one houre;
But doe it honourably; preth'ee Kala
Doe not betray me.
Madame, I will make it
Mine owne case; he shall thinke I am in loue with him.
I hope thou art not Kala.
Tis for your sake:
Ile tell him so; but Faith I am not, Lady.
Pray vse me kindly; let me not too soone
Be lost in my new follyes. Tis a Fate
That ouer-rules our wisdomes, whil'st we striue
To liue most free, wee'r caught in our owne toyles.
Diamonds cut Diamonds: they who will proue
To thriue in cunning, must cure loue with loue.
OVr Common-wealth is sick: tis more then time
That wee should wake the Head thereof, who sleepes
In the dull Lethargy of lost security.
The Commons murmur, and the Nobles grieue,
The Court is now turn'd Anticke, and growes wilde,
Whiles all the neighb'ring Nations stand at gaze,
And watch fit oportunity, to wreake
Their iust conceiued fury, on such iniuries,
As the late Prince, our liuing Masters Father,
Committed against Lawes of truth or honour.
Intelligence comes flying in on all sides,
Whilest the vnsteady multitude presume,
How that you, Aretus, and I, ingrosse
(Out of particular Ambition)
Th'affaires of gouernment, which I for my part,
Groane vnder, and am weary of.
I am as zealous too of shaking of
My gay State fetters, that I haue bethought
Of speedy remedy; and to that end
As I haue told yee, haue concluded with
Corax, the Princes chiefe Physician.
You should haue done this sooner, Aretus ;
You were his Tutor, and could best discerne
His dispositions to informe them rightly.
Passions of violent nature, by degrees
Are easili'st reclaim'd. There's something hid
Of his distemper, which wee'l now find out.
You come on iust appointment: welcome, Gentlemen,
Haue you won Rhetias (Corax?)
Most sincerely.
Saue yee, Nobilities: doe your Lordships take notice of my Page? Tis a fashion of the newest edition, spick and span new, without example. Doe your honour, Houswife.
There's a cursey for you, and a cursey for you.
Tis excellent: we must all follow fashion, and entertaine Shee-waiters.
'Twill be Courtly.
I thinke so; I hope the Chronicles will reare me one day for a head-piece—
Of Woodcocke without braines in't; Barbers shall weare thee on their Citternes, and Hucksters set thee out in Ginger-bread.
Deuill take thee: I say nothing to thee now; canst let me be quiet?
Y'are too perstreperous, Sauce-box.
Good Girle, if we begin to puffe once.
Prethee hold thy tongue, the Lords are in the presence.
Mum, Butterflye.
O the Prince: stand and keepe silence.
O the Prince: Wench, thou shalt see the Prince now.
Sir; Gracious Sir.
Why all this Company?
A Booke! is this the early exercise
I did prescribe? in stead of following health,
Which all me ̄ couet, you pursue your disease.
Where's your great Horse, your Hounds, your set at Tennis,
Your Balloone ball, the practice of your dancing,
Your casting of the sledge, or learning how
To tosse a Pike; all chang'd into a Sonnet?
Pray Sir grant me free liberty to leaue
The Court, it do's infect me with the sloth
Of sleepe and surfet: In the Vniuersity
I haue imployments, which to my profession
Adde profit and report: Here I am lost,
And in your wilfull dulnesse held a man
Of neither Art nor honesty: you may
Command my head; pray take it, doe; 'twere better
For me to lose it, then to lose my wits,
And liue in Bedlam: you will force me too't,
I am almost mad already.
I beleeue it.
Letters are come from Creete, which do require
A speedy restitution of such ships,
As by your Father were long since detain'd;
If not; defiance threatned.
These neere parts
Of Syria that adioyne, muster their friends:
And by intelligence we learne for certaine,
The Syrian will pretend an ancient interest
Of tribute intermitted.
Through your Land
Your subiects mutter strangely, and imagine
More then they dare speake publikely.
And yet
They talke but odly of you.
Hang 'em Mungrels.
Of me? my subiects talke of me?
Yes, scuruily,
And thinke worse (Prince.)
Ile borrow patience
A little time to listen to these wrongs,
And from the few of you which are here present,
Conceiue the generall voyce.
So, now he is nettled.
By all your loues I charge ye, without feare
Or flattery, to let me know your thoughts,
And how I am interpreted: Speake boldly.
For my part (Sir) I will be plaine, and briefe:
I thinke you are of Nature milde and easie,
Not willingly prouokt, but withall head-strong
In any passion that misleades your Iudgement.
I thinke you too indulgent to such motions,
As spring out of your owne affections,
To old to be reform'd, and yet too young
To take fit councell from your selfe, of what
Is most amisse.
So—Tutor, your conceit?
I think you doate (with pardon let me speak it)
Too much vpon your pleasures, and these pleasures
Are so wrapt vp in selfe-loue, that you couet
No other change of fortune: would be still
What your birth makes you, but are loth to toyle
In such affaires of State as breake your sleepes.
I thinke you would be by the world, reputed
A man in euery point compleat, but are
In manners and effect indeed a childe,
A boy, a very boy.
May it please your Grace,
I thinke you doe containe within your selfe
The great Elixer, soule and quintessence
Of all diuine perfections: are the glory
Of mankind, and the onely strict example
For earthly Monarchies to square out their liues by:
Times miracle, Fames pride, in Knowledge, Wit,
Sweetnesse, Discourse, Armes, Arts—
You are a Courtier.
But not of the ancient fashion, an't like your Highnesse. Tis I; I, that am the credit of the Court, Noble Prince: and if thou would'st by Proclamation or Patent, create me Ouerseer of all the Taylers in thy Do minions; then, then the golden dayes should appeare againe; bread should be cheaper; fooles should haue more wit; knaues more honesty; and beggers more money.
I thinke now—
Peace you Squall.
You haue not spoken yet.
Hang him, hee'l nothing but raile.
Most abominable: out vpon him.
Away Cuculus ; follow the Lords.
Close Page, close.
You are somewhat long a thinking.
I doe not thinke at all.
Am I not worthy of your thought?
My pitty you are—
But not my reprehension.
Pitty?
Yes, for I pitty such to whom I owe seruice, who exchange their happinesse for a misery.
Is it a misery to be a Prince?
Princes who forget their soueraignty, and yeeld to affected passion, are weary of command. You had a Father, Sir.
Your Soueraigne whiles he liu'd. But what of him?
Nothing. I onely dar'd to name him; that's all.
I charge thee by the duty that thou ow'st vs, be plaine in what thou meanest to speake: there's some thing that we must know: be free, our eares are open.
O Sir, I had rather hold a Wolfe by the eares, then stroake a Lyon, the greatest danger is the last.
This is meere trifling—Ha? are all stollen hence?
We are alone: Thou hast an honest looke,
Thou hast a tongue, I hope, that is not oyld
With flattery. Be open, though tis true,
That in my younger dayes I oft haue heard
Agenors name, my Father, more traduc'd,
Then I could then obserue; yet I protest,
I neuer had a friend, a certaine friend,
That would informe me throughly of such errors,
As oftentimes are incident to Princes.
All this may be. I haue seene a man so curious in feeling of the edge of a keene knife, that he has cut his fingers. My flesh is not of proofe against the metall I am to handle; the one is tenderer then the other.
I see then I must court thee. Take the word
Of a iust Prince for any thing thou speakest.
I haue more then a Pardon, thankes and loue.
I will remember you of an old Tale that somthing concernes you. Meleander, the great (but vnfortunate Statesman, was by your Father treated with for a Match betweene you and his eldest daughter, the Lady Eroclea. You were both neere of an age. I presume you remem ber a Contract, and cannot forget Her.
She was a louely beauty: Prethee forward.
To Court was Eroclea brought, was courted by your Father, not for Prince Palador, as it followed, but to be made a prey to some lesse noble designe.—With your fauour I haue forgot the rest.
Good call it backe agen into thy memory,
Else losing the remainder, I am lost too.
You charme me. In briefe, a Rape, by some bad Agents, was attempted; by the Lord Meleander her father rescude, she conuay'd away Meleander accus'd of treason, his Land seized, he himselfe distracted and confined to the Castle where he yet liues. What had ensude was doubtfull. But your Father shortly after dyed.
But what became of faire Eroclea?
She neuer since was heard of.
No hope liues then
Of euer, euer seeing her againe.
Sir, I feare I should anger yee. There was, as I said, an old Tale: I haue now a new one, which may per haps season the first with a more delightfull rellish.
I am prepar'd to heare, say what you please.
My Lord Meleander falling, on whose fauour my fortunes relyde, I furnisht my selfe for trauaile, and bent my course to Athens, where a pretty accident after a while came to my knowledge.
My eare is open to thee.
A young Lady contracted to a noble Gentle man, as the Lady we last mentioned, and your Highnes were, being hindred by their iarring Parents, stole from her home, and was conueyed like a Ship-boy in a Mer chant, from the Countrey where she liu'd, into Corinth first, and afterwards to Athens; where in much solitari nesse she liu'd like a Youth almost two yeeres, courted by all for acquaintance, but friend to none by familiari tie.
In habit of a man?
A handsome young man, till within these three moneths, or lesse, her sweet hearty Father dying some yeere before, or more, shee had notice of it, and with much ioy returned home, and as report voyced it, at A thens enioyed her happinesse: she was long an exile: For now Noble Sir, if you did loue the Lady Eroclea, why may not such safety and fate direct her, as directed the other? tis not impossible.
If I did loue her, Rhetias : yes I did.
Giue me thy hand: As thou didst serue Meleander,
And art still true to these, henceforth serue me.
My duty and my obedience are my suretie,
But I haue been too bold.
Forget the sadder story of my Father,
And onely Rhetias, learne to reade me well,
For I must euer thanke thee; th'ast vnlockt
A tongue was vow'd to silence, for requitall
Open my bosome, Rhetias.
What s your meaning?
To tye thee to an oath of secrecy—
Vnloose the buttons, man, thou dost it faintly,
What findst thou there?
A picture in a Tablet.
Looke well vpon't.
I doe—yes—let me obserue it—
Tis hers, the Ladies.
Whose!
Erocleas.
Hers that was once Eroclea : for her sake
Haue I aduanst Sophronos to the Helme
Of gouernment; for her sake will restore
Meleanders Honours to him; will for her sake
Beg friendship from thee, Rhetias. O be faithfull,
And let no politicke Lord worke from thy bosome
My griefes: I know thou wert put on to sift me:
But be not too secure.
I am your Creature.
Continue still thy discontented fashion:
Humour the Lords, as they would humour me;
Ile not liue in thy debt.—We are discouer'd.
Honour and health still wait vpon the Prince.
Sir, I am bold with fauour to present
Vnto your Highnes, Menaphon my friend,
Return'd from trauaile.
Humbly on my knees
I kisse your gracious hand.
It is our duty
To loue the vertuous.
If my prayers or seruice
Hold—any value, they are vow'd yours euer.
I haue a fist for thee too (Strippling) th'art started vp prettily since I saw thee. Hast learned any wit abroad? Canst tell newes, and sweare lyes with a grace like a true Traueller? What new Owzle's this?
Your Highnesse shall doe right to your owne iudgement,
In taking more then common notice of
This stranger, an Athenian, nam'd Parthenophill.
One, (whom if mine opinion doe not sooth me
Too grossely) for the fashion of his minde,
Deserues a deare respect.
Your commendations,
Sweet Cousin, speakes him Nobly.
All the powers
That centinell iust Thrones, double these guards
About your sacred Excellence.
What fortune led him to Cyprus!
My perswasions won him.
And if your Highnesse please to heare the en trance
Into their first aquaintance, you will say—
It was the newest, sweetest, prettiest accident,
That ere delighted your attention.
I can discourse it, Sir.
Some other time.
How is a cald?
Parthenophill.
Parthenophill?
Wee shall sort time to take more notice of him.
His wonted melancholy still pursues him.
I told you so.
You must not wonder at it.
I doe not, Lady.
Shall we to the Castle?
Wee will attend yee both.
All three—Ile goe too. Hark in thine eare, Gallant: Ile keep the old mad man in chat, whilest thou gabblest to the girle: my thumb's vpon my lips, not a word.
I neede not feare thee, Rhetias. —Sister, soone
Expect vs: this day wee will range the City.
Well, soone I shall expect yee.— Kala?
Trust mee.
Troope on—Loue, Loue, what a wonder thou art?
May I not be offensiue, Sir?
Your pleasure; yet pray be briefe.
Then briefly, good, resolue mee:
Haue you a Mistris, or a Wife?
I haue neither.
Nor did you euer loue in earnest any
Faire Lady, whom you wisht to make your owne?
Not any truly.
What your friends or meanes are
I will not be inquisitiue to know,
Nor doe I care to hope for. But admit
A dowre were throwne downe before your choyce,
Of Beauty, Noble birth, and sincere affection,
How gladly would you intertaine it? (Young man)
I doe not tempt you idly.
I shall thanke you,
When my vnsettled thoughts can make me sensible
Of what tis to be happy: for the present
I am your debtor: and faire Gentlewoman,
Pray giue me leaue as yet to study ignorance,
For my weake braines conceiue not what concerne me.
—Another time.—
Doe I breake off your Parley
That you are parting? Sure my woman loues you.
Can she speake well, Parthenophill?
Yes, Madame:
Discreetly chaste she can: she hath much won
On my beliefe, and in few words, but pithy,
Much moou'd my thankfulnesse. You are her Lady,
Your goodnesse aimes (I know) at her preferment:
Therefore I may be bold to make confession
Of truth, if euer I desire to thriue
In womans fauour. Kala is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to.
Indeed.
But say a Nobler Loue should interpose?
Where reall worth, and constancy first settle
A hearty truth, there greatnesse cannot shake it,
Nor shall it mine: yet I am but an Infant
In that construction, which must giue cleare light
To Kala's merit: riper houres hereafter
Must learne me how to grow rich in deserts.
Madame, my duty waits on you.
Come hither.
If euer henceforth I desire to thriue
In womans fauours, Kala is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to—'twas so.
These very words he spake.
These very words
Curse thee, vnfaithfull creature, to thy graue:
Thou wood'st him for thy selfe?
You said I should.
My name was neuer mentioned!
Madame, no:
We were not come to that.
Not come to that?
Art thou a Riuall fit to crosse my Fate?
Now pouerty and a dishonest fame,
The waiting-womans wages, be thy payment.
False, faithlesse, wanton beast, Ile spoile your carriage;
There's not a Page, a Groome, nay, not a Citizen
That shall be cast vpon yee. Kala,
Ile keepe thee in my serui •• all thy life time,
Without hope of a husband or a suter.
I haue not verily deseru'd this cruelty.
Parthenophill shall know, if he respect
My birth, the danger of a fond neglect.
Are you so quick? Well, I may chance to crosse
Your peeuishnesse. Now though I neuer meant
The young man for my selfe; yet if he loue me,
Ile haue him, or Ile run away with him,
And let her doe her worst then: what, we are all
But flesh and blood; the same thing that will doe
My Lady good, will please her woman too.
Tread softly ( Trollio ) my Father sleepes still.
I forsooth: but he sleepes like a Hare with his eyes open and that's no good signe.
Sure thou art weary of this sullen liuing,
But I am not; for I take more content
In my obedience here, then all delights
The time presents elsewhere.
Menander within. Oh!
Do'st heare that groane?
Heare it? I shudder, it was a strong blast, young Mistris, able to roote vp heart, liuer, lungs and all.
My much-wrong'd Father: let me view his face.
Lady Mistris, shall I fetch a Barbour to steale away his rough beard, whiles he sleepes in's naps? He neuer lookes in a glasse, and tis high time on conscience for him to bee trimd, has not been vnder the Shauers hand almost these foure yeeres.
Peace, foole.
I could clip the old Ruffian, there's haire enough to stuffe all the great Codpieces in Switzerland. A be gins to stirre, a stirres. Blesse vs how his eyes rowle. A good yeere keepe your Lordship in your right wits, I beseech yee.
Cleophila?
Sir, I am here, how d'ee Sir?
Sir, is your stomacke vp yet? get some warme porredge in your belly, 'tis a very good settle-braine.
The Rauen croakt, and hollow shreeks of Owles
Sung Dirges at her funerall; I laugh'd
The whiles: for twas no boot to weepe. The Girle
Was fresh and full of youth: but, O the cunning
Of Tyrants that looke bigge, their very frownes
Doome poore soules guilty, ere their cause be heard.
Good. What art thou, and thou?
I am Cleophila,
Your wofull daughter.
I am Trollia your honest implement.
I know yee both. 'las, why d'ee vse me thus!
Thy Sister, my Eroclea, was so gentle,
That Turtles in their Downe doe feed more gall,
Then her spleene mixt with: yet when winds and storme
Driue dirt and dust on banks of spotlesse snow,
The purest whitenesse is no such defence
Against the sullying foulenesse of that fury.
So rau'd Agenor, that great man, mischiefe
Against the Girle—'twas a politick tricke,
We were too old in Honour.—I am leane
And falne away extremely; most assuredly
I haue not dyn'd these three dayes.
Will you now, Sir?
I beseech yee heartily Sir. I feele a horrible puking my selfe.
Am I starke mad?
No, no, you are but a little staring—there's difference betweene staring and starke mad. You are but whymsed, yet crotchetted, conundroun'd, or so.
Here's all my care: and I doe often sigh
For thee, Cleophyla : we are secluded
From all good people. But take heed, Amethus
Was sonne to Doryla, Agenors Sister.
There's some ill blood about him, if the Surgeon
Haue not been very skilfull to let all out.
I am (alas) too grieu'd to thinke of loue,
That must concerne me least.
Sirra, be wise, be wise.
Who I? I will be monstrous and wise immedi ately. Welcome, Gentlemen, the more the merrier, Ile lay the cloth, and set the stooles in a readinesse, for I see here is some hope of dinner now.
My Lord Meleander, Menaphon your Kinsman
Newly return'd from trauaile, comes to tender
His duty t'ee: to you his loue, faire Mistris.
I would I could as easily remoue
Sadnesse from your remembrance, Sir, as study
To doe you faithfull seruice—my deare Cousin,
All best of comforts blesse your sweet obedience.
One chiefe of 'em (worthy Cousin) liues
In you, and your well-doing.
This young stranger
Will well deserue your knowledge.
For my friends sake,
Lady pray giue him welcome.
He has met it, if sorrowes can looke kindly.
You much honour me.
How a eyes the company: sure my passion will betray my weakenesse—O my Master, my Noble Master, doe not forget me, I am still the humblest, and the most faithfull in heart of those that serue you.
Ha, ha, ha.
There's wormewood in that laughter, tis the vsher to a violent extremity.
I am a weake old man. All these are come To ieere my ripe calamities.
Good Vncle!
But Ile out-stare 'ee all, fooles, desperate fooles,
You are cheated, grossely cheated, range, range on,
And rowle about the world to gather mosse,
The mosse of honour, gay reports, gay clothes,
Gay wiues, huge empty buildings, whose proud roofes,
Shall with their pinacles, euen reach the starres.
Ye worke and worke like Moles, blind in the paths,
That are bor'd through the crannies of the earth,
To charge your hungry soules with such full surfets,
As being gorg'd once, make 'ee leane with plenty.
And when ye haue skimd the vomit of your riots,
Y'are fat in no felicity but folly,
Then your last sleepes seize on 'ee. Then the troopes
Of wormes crawle round, &, feast, good cheare, rich fare,
Dainty delicious—here's Cleophyl • :
All the poore stocke of my remaining thrift;
You, you, the Princes Cousin: how d'ee like her?
( Amethus ) how d'ee like her?
My intents are iust and honourable.
Sir, beleeue him.
Take her.—we two must part, go to him, doe.
This sight is full of horror.
This is sence yet in this distraction.
In this Iewell I haue giuen away,
All what I can call mine. When I am dead,
Saue charge; let me be buried in a nooke.
No guns, no pompous whining: these are fooleries.
If whiles we liue, we stalke about the streets,
Iustled by Carmen, Foot-poasts, and fine Apes,
In silken coates, vnminded, and scarce thought on;
It is not comely to be hal'd to the earth,
Like high fed lades vpon a Tilting-day,
In antique trappings: scorne to vse-lesse teares.
Eroclea was not coffind so: she perisht,
And no eye dropt saue mine, and I am childish.
I talke like one that doates; laugh at me, Rhetias,
Or raile at me: they will not giue me meate:
They haue staru'd me: but Ile henceforth be mine owne Cook.
Good morrow: tis too early for my cares
To reuell. I will breake my heart a little,
And tell yee more hereafter. Pray be merry.
Ile follow him. My Lord Amethus, vse your time
Respectiuely. Few words to purpose soon'st preuaile:
Study no long Orations; be plaine and short,
Ile follow him.
Cleophyla, although these blacker clouds
Of sadnes, thicken and make darke the sky
Of thy faire eyes, yet giue me leaue to follow
The streame of my affections: they are pure,
Without all mixture of vnnoble thoughts.
Can you be euer mine?
I am so low
In mine owne fortunes, and my Father woes,
That I want words to tell yee, you deserue
A worthier choice.
But giue me leaue to hope.
My friend is serious.
Sir, this for answer: If I euer thriue
In an earthly happinesse, the next
To my good Fathers wisht recouery,
Must be my thankfulnesse to your great merit;
Which I dare promise for the present time:
You cannot vrge more from me.
Ho, Cleophyla?
This Gentleman is moou'd.
Your eyes, Parthenophill,
Are guilty of some passion.
Friend, what ailes thee?
All is not well within me, Sir.
Meleander within. Cleophyla?
Sweet Maid, forget me not; we now must part.
Still you shall haue my prayer.
Still you my truth.
DOe not I looke freshly, and like a Youth of the Trim?
As rare an old Youth as euer walkt crosse-gartered.
Here are my Mistrisses mustred in white and blacke. Kala the Waiting-woman. I will first begin at the soote: stand thou for Kala.
I stand for Kala, doe your best and your worst.
I must looke bigge, and care little or nothing for her, because shee is a creature that stands at liuery. Thus I talke wisely, and to no purpose. Wench, as it is not fit that thou should'st be either faire or honest; so considering thy seruice, thou art as thou art, and so are thy betters, let them bee what they can bee. Thus in despite and defiance of all thy good parts, if I cannot in dure thy basenesse, tis more out of thy courtesie, then my deseruing, and so I expect thy answer.
I must confesse—
Well said.
You are—
That's true too.
To speake you right, a very scuruy fellow.—
Away, away, do'st thinke so?
A very foule-mouth'd, and misshapen Cocks combe
Ile neuer beleeue it by this hand.
A Magot, most vnworthy to creepe in—
—To the least wrinckle of a Gentlewomans
(What d'ee call) good conceit, or so, or what
You will else.—Were you not refin'd by Courtship
And education, which in my bleare eyes
Makes you appeare as sweet as any nosegay,
Or sauory cod of Muske new fall'n from th'Cat.
This shall serue well enough for the Waiting-woman. My next Mistris is Cleophyla, the old mad-mans daughter: I must come to her in whining tune, sigh, wipe mine eyes, fold my Armes, and blubber out my speech as thus: Euen as a Kennell of Hounds (sweet Lady) cannot catch a Hare, when they are full pauncht on the Carrion of a dead Horse: so, euen so the gorge of my affections being full cramm'd with the garboyles of your condolements, doth tickle me with the prick (as it were) about mee, and fellow-feeling of howling out right.
This will doo't, if we will heare.
Thou seest I am crying ripe, I am such another tender-hearted foole.
Euen as the snuffe of a candle that is burnt in the socket, goes out, and leaues a strong perfume behind it; or as a piece of toasted cheese next the heart in a morning is a restoratiue for a sweet breath: so, euen so the odoriferous sauour of your loue doth perfume my heart, (Hay ho) with the pure sent of an intolerable content, and not to be indur'd.
By this hand tis excellent. Haue at thee last of all: for the Princesse Thamasta, she that is my Mistris indeed, she is abominably proud. A Lady of a damna ble, high, turbulent, and generous spirit. But I haue a loud-mouth'd Cannon of mine owne to batter her, and a pen'd speech of purpose obserue it.
Thus I walke by, heare and minde you not.
Though haughty as the Diuell or his Dam,
Thou dost appeare, great Mistris: yet I am
Like to an vgly fire-worke, and can mount
Aboue the Region of thy sweet Ac—count.
Wert thou the Moone her selfe, yet hauing seene thee,
Behold the man ordain'd to mooue within thee.
—Looke to your selfe, Houswife; answer me
In strong Lines y'are best.
Keepe off, poore foole, my beames will strike thee blinde:
Else if thou touch me, touch me but behind.
In Palaces, such as passe in before,
Must be great Princes; for at the backe dore
Tatter-demallians waite, who know not how
To get admittance: such a one—art Thou.
S'foot, this is downe-right roaring.
I know how to present a big Lady in her owne cue. But pray in earnest, are you in loue with all these?
Pish, I haue not a ragge of loue about me. Tis only a foolish humour I am possest with, to be surnam'd the Conquerour. I will court any thing; be in loue with nothing, nor no—thing.
A rare man you are, I protest.
Yes, I know I am a rare man, and I euer held my selfe so.
In amorous contemplation on my life;
Courting his Page by Hel. con.
Tis false.
A grosse vntruth; Ile iustifie it, Sir, At any time, place, weapon.
Marry shall she.
No quarrels, good'ee Whiske. Lay by your Trumperies, and fall to your practice. Instructions are ready for you all. Pelias is your Leader, follow him. Get credit now or neuer. Vanish, Doodles, vanish.
For the Deuice.
The same, get'ee gone, and make no bawling.
To waste my time thus Droane-like in the Court,
And lose so many houres, as my studies
Haue horded vp, is to be like a man
That creepes both on his hands and knees, to climbe
A mountaines top, where when he is ascended,
One carelesse slip downe, tumbles him againe
Into the bottome whence a first began.
I need no Princes fauour: Princes need
My art. Then Corax, be no more a Gull,
The best of'em cannot foole thee, nay, they shall not.
We find him timely now let's learne the cause.
Tis fit we should—Sir, we approue you learn'd,
And since your skill can best discerne the humours
That are predominant, in bodies subiect
To alteration: tell vs (pray) what diuell
This Melancholy is, which can transforme
Men into Monsters.
Y'ar your selfe a Scholer,
And quicke of apprehension: Melancholy
Is not as you conceiue. Indisposition
Of body, but the mindes disease. So Extasie,
Fantastick Dotage, Madnesse, Phrenzey, Rupture,
Of meere imagination differ partly
Vid. De mocrit. Iu nior. From Melancholy, which is briefly this,
A meere commotion of the minde, o're-charg'd
With feare and sorrow; first begot i'th' braine,
The Seate of Reason, and from thence deriu'd
As suddenly into the Heart, the Seate
Of our Affection.
There are sundry kinds
Of this disturbance.
Infinite, it were
More easie to coniecture euery houre
We haue to liue, then reckon vp the kinds,
Or causes of this anguish of the minde.
Thus you conclude, that as the cause is doubt full,
The cure must be impossible; and then
Our Prince (poore Gentleman) is lost for euer,
As well vnto himselfe, as to his subiects.
My Lord, you are too quick; thus much I dare
Promise, and doe, ere many minutes passe,
I will discouer whence his sadnesse is,
Or vndergoe the censure of my ignorance.
You are a Noble Scholer.
For reward,
You shall make your owne demand.
May I be sure?
We both will pledge our truth.
Tis soone perform'd,
That I may be discharg'd from my attendance
At Court, and neuer more be sent for after:
Or if I be, may Rats gnaw all my bookes,
If I get home once, and come here againe,
Though my necke stretch a halter for't, I care not.
Come, come, you shall not feare it.
Ile acquaint yee
With what is to be done, and you shall fashion it.
My Lady do's expect'ee, thinks all time
Too slow till you come to her: wherefore young man,
If you intend to loue me, and me onely,
Before we part, without more circumstance
Let vs betroth our selues.
I dare not wrong 'ee;
You are too violent.
Wrong me no more
Then I wrong you: be mine, and I am yours:
I cannot stand on points.
Then to resolue
All further hopes, you neuer can be mine,
Must not, (and pardon though I say) you shall not.
The thing is sure a Gelding—Shall not? well,
Y'are best to prate vnto my Lady now,
What proffer I haue made.
Neuer, I vow.
Doe, doe, tis but a kind heart of mine owne,
And ill lucke can vndoe me.—Be refus'd?
O sciruy.—Pray walke on, Ile ouertake 'ee.
What a greene-sickness-liuer'd Boy is this!
My Maiden-head will shortly grow so stale,
That'twill be mouldy: but Ile marre her market.
Parthenophill past the way; prethee Kala
Direct me to him.
Yes, I can direct'ee:
But you (Sir) must forbeare.
Forbeare!
I said so.
Your bounty h'as ingag'd my truth; receiue
A secret, that will, as you are a man,
Startle your Reason: tis but meere respect
Of what I owe to thankfulnesse. (Deare Sir)
The Stranger whom your courtesie receiued
For Friend, is made your Riuall.
Riuall, Kala.
Take heed, thou art too credulous.
My Lady
Doates on him: I will place you in a roome,
Where, though you cannot heare, yet you shall see
Such passages as will confirme the truth
Of my intelligence.
Twill make me mad.
Yes, yes: it makes me mad too, that a Gentle man
So excellently sweet, so liberall,
So kind, so proper, should be so betray'd
By a young smooth-chind straggler: but for loues sake
Beare all with manly courage.—Not a word,
I am vndone then.
That were too much pity:
Honest most honest Kala ; tis thy care,
Thy seruiceable care.
You haue euen spoken all can be said or thought.
I will reward thee:
But as for him, vngentle Boy, Ile whip
His falshood with a vengeance.—
O speake little.
Walke vp these staires, and take this key, it opens
A Chamber doore, where at that window yonder,
You may see all their courtship.
I am silent.
As little noyse as may be, I beseech yee;
There is a backe-staire to conuey yee forth
Vnseene or vnsuspected.—He that cheates
A Waiting-woman of a free good turne
She longs for, must expect a shrewd reuenge.
Sheepe-spirited Boy, although he had not married me,
He might haue proferd kindnesse in a corner,
And ne'er haue been the worse sor't. They are come;
On goes my set of Faces most demurely.
Forbeare the roome.
Yes, Madame.
Whosoeuer requires accesse to me, deny him entrance till I call thee, and wait without.
I shall. Sweet Venus, turne his courage to a Snow-ball, I heartily beseech it.
I expose
The Honour of my Birth, my Fame, my Youth,
To hazard of much hard construction,
In seeking an aduenture of a parley
So priuate with a Stranger; if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soone
Conceiue, I haue laid by that modesty,
Which should preserue a vertuous name vnstain'd.
Lady, to shorten long excuses; time
And safe experience haue so throughly arm'd
My apprehension, with a reall taste
Of your most Noble nature, that to question
The least part of your bounties, or that freedome
Which Heauen hath with a plenty made you rich in,
Would argue me vnciuill, which is more,
Base-bred, and which is most of all, vnthankefull.
The constant Loadstone, and the Steele are found
In seuerall Mines: yet is there such a league
Betweene these Minerals, as if one Veine
Of earth had nourisht both. The gentle Mirtle
Is not ingraft vpon an Oliues stocke:
Yet nature hath betweene them lockt a secret
Of Sympathy, that being planted neere,
They will both in their branches, and their rootes
Imbrace each other; twines of Iuie round
The well growne Oake; the Vine doth court the Elme;
Yet these are different Plants. Parthenophill,
Consider this aright, then these sleight creatures,
Will fortifie the reasons I should frame
For that vngrounded (as thou think'st) affection,
Which is submitted to a strangers pitie.
True loue may blush, when shame repents too late,
But in all actions Nature yeelds to Fate.
Great Lady, 'twere a dulnesse must exceed
The grossest and most sottish kind of ignorance,
Not to be sensible of your intents:
I clearely vnderstand them. Yet so much
The difference betweene that height and lownesse,
Which doth distinguish our vnequall fortunes,
Disswades me from ambition; that I am
Humbler in my desires, then Loues owne power
Can any way raise vp.
I am a Princesse,
And know no law of slauery, to sue,
Yet be denied?
I am so much a subiect
To euery law of Noble honesty,
That to transgresse the vowes of perfect friendship,
I hold a sacriledge as foule, and curs'd,
As if some holy Temple had bin robd,
And I the thiefe.
Thou art vnwise, young man,
To inrage a Lyonesse.
It were vniust
To falsifie a faith, and euer after
Disroab'd of that faire ornament, liue naked,
A scorne to time and truth.
Remember well who I am, and what thou art.
That remembrance
Prompts me to worthy duty, O great Lady.
If some few dayes haue tempted your free heart,
To cast away affection on a stranger:
If that affection haue so ouersway'd
Your Iudgement, that it in a manner hath
Declyn'd your soueraignty of birth and spirit:
How can yee turne your eyes off from that glasse,
Wherein you may new Trim, and settle right
A memorable name?
The Youth is idle.
Dayes, months and yeeres are past, since Mena phon
Hath lou'd and seru'd you truly: Menaphon ;
A man of no large distance in his bloud,
From yours; in qualities desertfull, grac't
With Youth, Experience; euery happy gift
That can by nature, or by Education
Improue a Gentleman: for him (great Lady)
Let me preuaile, that you will yet at last,
Vnlocke the bounty, which your loue and care
Haue wisely treasur'd vp, t'inrich his life.
Thou hast a moouing eloquence; Parthenophill,
Parthenophill, in vaine we striue to crosse
The destiny that guides vs. My great heart
Is stoopt so much beneath that wonted pride
That first disguiz'd it, that I now preferre
A miserable life with thee, before
All other earthly comforts.
Menaphon, by me, repeates the selfe-same words to you:
You are too cruell, if you can distrust
His truth, or my report.
Goe where thou wilt,
Ile be an exile with thee, I will learne
To beare all change of fortunes.
For my friend, I pleade with grounds of reason.
For thy loue,
Hard-hearted youth, I here renounce all thoughts
Of other hopes, of other intertainements,—
Stay, as you honour Vertue.
When the proffers of other greatnesse—
Lady.
When intreats of friends;—
Ile ease your griefe.
Respect of kindred;
Pray giue me hearing.
Losse of Fame;
I craue but some few minutes.
Shall infringe my vowes, let Heauen—
My loue speake t'ee; heare then, goe on.
Thy loue, why tis a Charme to stop a vow
In its most violent course.
Cupid has broke
His Arrowes here; and like a child vnarm'd,
Comes to make sport betweene vs with no weapon,
But feathers stolne from his mothers Doues.
This is meere trifling.
Lady, take a secret.
I am as you are, in a lower ranke
Else of the selfe samesexe, a maide, a virgine.
And now to vse your owne words, if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soone
Conceiue, I haue laid by that modesty,
Which should preserue a vertuous name vnstain'd.
Are you not mankind then?
When you shall reade
The story of my sorrowes, with the change
Of my misfortunes, in a letter printed
From my vnforg'd relation; I beleeue
You will not thinke the sheading of one teare,
A prodigality that misbecomes
Your pitie and my fortune.
Pray conceale the errors of my passions.
Would I had
Much more of honour (as for life I value't not)
To venture on your secrecy.
It will be
A hard taske for my Reason, to relinquish
The affection which was once deuoted thine,
I shall a while repute thee still the youth
I lou'd so dearely.
You shall find mee euer, your ready faithfull seruant.
O the powers
Who doe direct our hearts, laugh at our follies!
We must not part yet.
Let not my vnworthines alter your good opinion.
I shall henceforth
Be iealous of thy company with any;
My feares are strong and many.
Did your Ladiship call me?
For what?
Your seruant Menaphon desires admittance.
With your leaue, great Mistris! I come—
So priuate: is this well, Parthenophill?
Sir, Noble Sir.
You are vnkind and treacherous.
This tis to trust a straggler.
Prethee seruant.
I dare not question you, you are my Mistris;
My Princes neerest Kinswoman, but he—
Come, you are angry.
Henceforth I will bury
Vnmanly passion in perpetuall silence.
Ile court mine owne distraction, dote on folly,
Creepe to the mirth and madnesse of the age,
Rather then be so slau'd againe to woman,
Which in her best of constancy is steddist
In change and scorne.
How dare ye talke to me thus?
Dare? Were you not owne Sister to my friend,
Sister to my Amethus ; I would hurle ye
As farre off from mine eyes, as from my heart;
For I would neuer more looke on yee. Take
Your Iewell t'ee. And Youth, keepe vnder wing,
Or—Boy—Boy.
If commands be of no force,
Let me intreat thee, Menaphon.
Tis naught, fye, fye, Parthenophill, haue I deseru'd
To be thus vs'd?
I doe protest—
You shall not,
Henceforth I will be free, and hate my bondage.
Away, away to Court, the Prince is pleas'd
To see a Maske to night, we must attend him:
Tis neere vpon the time.—How thriues your suit?
The Iudge, your Sister, will decide it shor • ly.
Parthenophill, I will not trust you from me.
Lights and attendance, I will shew your highnes,
A trifle of mine owne braine If you can,
Imagine you were now in the Vniuersity,
You'll take it well enough, a Schollers fancy,
A quab. Tis nothing else a very quab.
We will obserue it.
Yes, and grace it too Sir.
For Corax else is • umorous and testy.
By any meanes, men singular in Art,
Haue alwayes some odde whimsey more then vsuall.
The name of this conceit.
Sir, it is called the Maske of Melancholy.
We must looke for nothing but sadnesse, here then.
Madnesse rather
In seuerall changes: Melancholy is
The Roote aswell of euery Apish Phrensey,
Laughter and mirth, as dulnesse. Pray my Lord
Hold and obserue the plot, tis there exprest
In kind, what shall be now exprest in action.
No interpretation, take your places quickly.
Nay, nay, leaue ceremony: sound to the entrance.
Bow, Bow, wow, wow; the Moone's eclipsed, Ile to the Church-yard and sup: Since I turn'd Wolfe, I bark and howle, and digge vp graues, I will neuer haue the Sunne shine againe, tis midnight, deepe darke mid night, get a prey, and fall too, I haue catcht thee now. Arre.
This kind is called, Lycanthropia, Sir,
When men conceiue themselues Wolues.
Here I finde it.
I will hang 'em all, and burne my wife: was I not an Emperour; my hand was kist, and Ladies lay downe be fore me. In triumph did I ride with my Nobles about me, till the mad-dog bit mee, I fell, and I fell, and I fell. It shall be treason by Statute for any man to name wa ter, or wash his hands throughout all my Dominions; breake all the looking-glasses, I will not see my hornes; my wife Cuckolds me, she is a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore.
Hydrophobia terme you this?
And men possest so, shun all sight of water:
Sometimes, if mixt with iealousie, it renders them.
Incurable, and oftentimes brings death.
Philosophers dwel in the Moone Speculation and Theory girdle the world about like a wall. Ignorance like an Atheist, must bee damn'd in the pit. I am very, very poore, and pouerty is the phisicke for the soule: my opinions are pure and perfect. Enuy is a monster, and I defie the beast.
Delirium this is call'd, which is meere dotage,
Sprung from Ambition first, and singularity,
Selfe loue, and blind opinion of true merit.
I not dislike the course.
Yes forsooth, and no forsooth, is not this fine, I pray, your blessing Gaffer, here, here, here did hee giue me a shough, and cut offs taile: busse, busse Nuncle, and ther's a pum for Daddee.
You find this noted there, Phrenitis.
True.
Pride is the ground on't;
It raignes most in women.
They that will learne to drinke a health in Hell,
Must learne on earth to take Tobacco well,
To take Tobacco well, to take Tobacco well:
For in Hell they drink nor Wine, nor Ale, nor Beere,
But fire, and smoake, and stench, as we do heere.
Ile soope thee vp.
Thou'st straight to execution.
Foole, Foole, Foole, catch me and thou canst.
Expell him the house, tis a Dunce.
Harke, did yee not heare a rumbling,
The Gobblings are now a tumbling:
Il • teare 'em, Ile seare'em,
Ile roare 'em, Ile goare 'em:
Now, now, now, my braines are a Iumbling,—
Bounce, the gun's off.
You name this here, Hypocondriacall.
Which is a windy flattuous humour stuffing
The head, and thence deriu'd to th'animall parts
To be too ouer-curious, losse of goods,
Or friends, excesse of feare, or sorrowes cause it.
Good your Honours,
Pray your Worships,
Deare your Beauties,
Hang thee.
To lash your sides,
To taeme your hides,
To scourge your prides,
And bang thee.
Were pretty and dainty, and I will begin,
See how they doe Ieere me, deride me, and grin:
Come sport me, come court me, your Topsaile aduance,
And let vs conclude our delights in a Dance.
A Dance, a Dance, a Dance.
This is the Wanton Melancholy ; women
With child possest with this strange sury often,
Haue danc'd three dayes together without ceasing.
Tis very strange: but Heau'n is full of miracles.
We are thy debtor ( Corax ) for the gift
Of this inuention: but the plot deceiues vs;
What meanes this empty space.
One kind of Melancholy
Is onely left vntouch'd; twas not in Art
To personate the shadow of that Fancy.
Tis nam'd Loue-Melancholy. As for instance,
Admit this stranger here (Young man, stand forth)
Intangled by the beauty of this Lady,
The great Thamasta, cherisht in his heart
The waight of hopes and feares: it were impossible,
To lymne his passions in such liuely colours,
As his owne proper sufferance coo'd expresse.
You are not modest Sir.
Am I your mirth?
Loue is the Tyrant of the heart, it darkens
Reason, confounds discretion, deafe to counsell:
It runnes a headlong course to desperate madnesse.
O were your Highnes but toucht home, and throughly,
With this (what shall I call it) Diuell—
Hold, let no man henceforth name the word agen
Wait you my pleasure, Youth; tis late, to rest.
My Lords—
Enough, thou art a perfect Arts-man.
Panthers may hide their heads, not change the skin:
And loue pent ne're so close yet will be seene.
DOate on a stranger?
Court him, plead, and sue to him,
Affectionately?
Seruilely; and pardon me, if I say basely.
Women in their passions,
Like false fiers flash, to fright our trembling sences;
Yet in themselues containe nor light nor heate.
My Sister doe this? Shee, whose pride did scorne
All thoughts that were not busied on a Crowne?
To fall so farre beneath her fortunes now?
You are my friend.
What I confirme, is truth.
Truth, Menaphon?
If I conceiu'd you were
Iealous of my sincerity and plainnesse,
Then Sir—
What then, Sir?
I would then resolue,
You were as changeable in vowes of friendship,
As is Thamasta in her choice of loue.
That sinne is double, running in a blood,
Which iustifies another being worse.
My Menaphon, excuse me, I grow wilde,
And would not willingly beleeue the truth
Of my dishonour: She shall know how much
I am a debtor to thy noble goodnesse,
By checking the contempt, her poore desires
Haue sunke her fame in. Prethee tell me (friend)
How did the Youth receiue her?
With a coldnesse,
As modest and as hopelesse, as the trust
I did repose in him, coo'd wish, or merit.
I will esteeme him dearely.
Sir, your Sister.
Seruant, I haue imployment for yee.
Harke yee:
The maske of your ambition is fallen off,
Your pride hath stoop't to such an abiect lownesse,
That you haue now discouer'd to report
Your nakednesse in vertue, honors, shame—
You are turn'd Satyre.
All the flatteries
Of greatnesse haue expos'd yee to contempt.
This is meere rayling.
You haue sold your birth, for lust.
Lust?
Yes, and at a deare expence
Purchast the onely glories of a Wanton.
A Wanton?
Let repentance stop your mouth.
Learne to redeeme your fault.
I hope your tongue ha's not betrayd my honesty.
Feare nothing.
If ( Menaphon, ) I hitherto haue stroue;
To keepe a wary guard about my fame;
If I haue vsed a womans skill to sift
The constancy of your protested loue;
You cannot in the Iustice of your iudgment,
Impute that to a Coynesse, or neglect,
Which my discretion and your seruice aym'd
For noble purposes.
Great Mistris, no:
I rather quarrell with mine owne ambition,
That durst to soare so high, as to feed hope
Of any least desert, that might intitle
My duty, to a pension from your fauours.
And therefore Lady (pray obserue him well)
He henceforth couets playne equality;
Indeuouring to rancke his fortunes low,
With some fit partner, whom without presumption,
Without offence, or danger, he may cherish;
Yes and command too, as a Wife; a Wife;
A Wife, my most great Lady
all will out.
Now I perceiue the league of Amitye,
Which you haue long betweene yee, vow'd and kept,
I • s • cred and inuiolable, secrets
Of e • ery nature are in common t'ee:
I haue trespass'd, and I haue been faulty:
Let not too rude a Censure doome me guilty,
Or iudge my errour wilfull without pardon.
Gracious and vertuous Mistris.
Tis a tricke,
There is no trust in female cunning (friend)
Let her first purge her follies past, and cleere
The wrongs done to her honor, by some sure
Apparant testimony of her constancy:
Or wee will not beleeue these childish plots;
As you respect my friendship, lend no eare
To a reply. Thinke on't.
Pray loue your fame.
Gon! I am sure awakt. Kala I finde,
You haue not been so trusty as the duty
You ow'd, requir'd.
Not I? I doe protest, I haue been, Madam.
Bee no matter what.
I'me pay'd in mine owne Coyne; something I must,
And speedily—so,—seeke out Cuculus
Bid him attend me instantly.
That Anticke!
The trim old Youth shall wait yee.
Wounds may be mortall, which are wounds indeed:
" But no wounds deadly, till our Honors bleed. Exeunt.
Thar't an excellent fellow. Diabolo. O this lousie close-stoole Empricks, that will vndertake all Cures, yet know not the causes of any disease. Dog-leaches. By the foure Elements I honor thee, coo'd finde in my heart to turne knaue, and bee thy flatterer.
Sirra, tis pitty th'ast not been a Scholer;
Th'art honest, blunt, and rude enough. O Conscience!
But for thy Lord now, I haue put him too't.
He chafes hugely, fumes like a stew-pot; Is he not monstrously ouergone in frenzy?
Rhetias, tis not a madnesse, but his sorrow's
Close griping griefe, and anguish of the soule
That torture him: he carries Hell on earth
Within his bosome, 'twas a Princes tyranny
Caus'd his distraction, and a Princes sweetnes
Must qualifie that tempest of his minde.
Corax, to prayse thy Art, were to assure
The misbeleeuing world, that the Sunne shines,
When tis in th'full Meridian of his beauty.
No cloud of blacke detraction can eclipse
The light of thy rare knowledge; henceforth casting
All poore disguises off, that play in rudenesse,
Call me your seruant: onely for the present,
I wish a happy blessing to your Labours;
Heauen crowne your vndertakings; and beleeue me,
Ere many houres can passe, at our next meeting,
The bonds my duty owes, shall be full cancelled.
Farwell—a shrewd-braine Whorson, there's pith
In his vntoward plainenesse.—
Now, the newes!
Worshipfull Master Doctor, I haue a great deale of I cannot tell what, to say t'ee; My Lord thun ders: euery word that comes out of his mouth, roares like a Cannon: the house shooke once, my young Lady dares not be seene.
We will roare with him, Trollio, if he roare.
He has got a great Poll-axe in his hand, and fences it vp and downe the house, as if he were to make roome for the Pageants. I haue prouided me a Murrion forfeare of a clap on the Coxcombe.
No matter for the Murrion, here's my Cap:
Thus I will pull it downe; and thus out-stare him.
The Physicion is got as mad as my Lord.—
O braue, a man of Worship.
Let him come, Trollio, I will firke his Trangdido,
And bounce, and bounce in metall, honest Trollio.
Hee vapours like a Tinker, and struts like a Iuggler.
There, there, there; looke to your Right Wor shipfull, looke to your selfe.
Show me the Dog, whose triple throated noyse,
Hath rowzd a Lyon from his vncoth den,
To teare the Curre in pieces.
Stay thy pawes,
Couragious beast, else lo, the gorgeous skull,
That shall transforme thee, to that restlesse stone,
Which Sysiphus roules vp against the hill;
Whence tumbling downe againe, it, with his waight
Shall crush thy bones, and puffe thee into Ayre.
Hold, hold thy conqu'ring breath, tis stronger far
Then Gun-powder and Garlike. If the Fates
Haue spun my thred, and my spent-clue of life
Be now vntwisted, let vs part like friends.
Lay vp my weapon, Trollio, and be gone.
Yes Sir, with all my heart.—
This friend and I will walke, and gabble wisely.
I allow the motion: On.
So Polititians thriue,
That with their crabbed faces, and sly tricks
Legerdemayne, ducks, cringes, formall beards,
Crisp'd haires, and punctuall cheats, do wriggle in
Their heads first, like a Foxe, to roomes of State,
Then the whole body followes.
Then they fill Lordships, steale womens hearts: with them and their's the world runnes round, yet these are square men still.
There are none poore, but such as ingrosse offices.
None wise; but vnthrifts, bankrupts, beggers, Rascals.
The hangman is a rare Phisician.
Thats not so good, it shalbe granted.
All the buz of Drugs, and Myneralls and Simples,
Bloud-lettings, Vomits, Purges, or what else
Is coniur'd vp by men of Art, to gull
Liege-people, and reare golden piles, are trash
To a well-strong-wrought halter; there the Coute,
The stone, yes and the Melancholy deuill,
Are cur'd in lesse time then a paire of minutes.
Build me a Gallows in this very plot,
And Ile dispatch your businesse.
Fix the knot right vnder the left eare.
Sirra, make ready.
Yet doe not be too sudden, grant me leaue,
To giue a farewell to a creature long
Absented from me, tis a daughter (Sir)
Snatcht from me in her youth, a handsome girle,
Shee comes to aske a blessing.
Pray where is shee? I cannot see her yet.
Shee makes more haste
In her quicke prayers then her trembling steppes,
Which many griefes haue weakened.
Cruell man!
How canst thou rip a heart, that's cleft already
With iniuries of time? whilst I am franticke,
Whilst throngs of rude diuisions huddle on,
And doe difranke my braines from peace, and sleepe;
So long I am insensible of cares.
As balls of wild-fire may be safely toucht,
Not violently sundred, and throwne vp;
So my distemper'd thoughts rest in their rage,
Not hurryed in the Ayre of repetition,
Or memory of my misfortunes past.
Then are my griefes strooke home,
When they are reclaym'd,
To their owne pitty of themselues—Proceed;
What of your daughter now?
I cannot tell yee,
Tis now out of my head againe; my braines
Are crazie; I haue scarce slept one sound sleepe
These twelue moneths.
'las poore man; canst thou imagine
To prosper in the taske thou tak'st in hand,
By practising a cure vpon my weakenesse,
And yet be no Physician for thy selfe?
Goe, goe, turne ouer all thy bookes once more,
And learne to thriue in modesty; for impudence
Does least become a Scholer. Thou art a foole,
A kind of learned foole.
I doe confesse it.
If thou canst wake with me, forget to eate,
Renounce the thought of Greatnesse; tread on Fate;
Sigh out a lamentable tale of things
Done long agoe, and ill done; and when sighes
Are wearied, piece vp what remaines behind,
With weeping eyes, and hearts that bleed to death:
Thou shalt be a companion fit for me,
And we will sit together like true friends,
And neuer be deuided. With what greedinesse
Doe I hug my afflictions? there's no mirth
Which is not truly season'd with some madnesse.
As for example.—
What new Crochet next?
There is so much sence in this wilde distraction,
That I am almost out of my wits too,
To see and heare him: some few houres more
Spent here, would turne me Apish, if not frantick.
In all the volumes thou hast turn'd, thou Man
Of knowledge, hast thou met with any rarity,
Worthy thy contemplation like to this?
The modell of the Heauens, the Earth, the Waters,
The harmony, and sweet consent of times,
Are not of such an excellence, in forme
Of their Creation, as the infinite wonder
That dwelles within the compasse of this face:
And yet I tell thee, Scholer, vnder this
Well-ord'red signe, is lodg'd such an obedience,
As will hereafter in another age,
Strike all comparison into a silence.
She had a Sister too: but as for her,
If I were giuen to talke, I coo'd describe
A pretty piece of goodnesse: let that passe—
We must be wise somtimes: What would you with her?
I with her! nothing by your leaue, Sir, I:
It is not my profession.
You are sawcy,
And as I take it, scuruy in your sawcinesse,
To vse no more respect—good soule, be patient:
We are a paire of things the world doth laugh at:
Yet be content, Cleophila ; those clouds
Which barre the Sunne from shining on our miseries,
Will neuer be chac'd off till I am dead;
And then some charitable soule will take thee
Into protection. I am hasting on,
The time cannot be long.
I doe beseech yee,
Sir, as you loue your health, as you respect
My safety, let not passion ouerrule you.
It shall not, I am friends with all the world.
Get me some wine, to witnesse that I will be
An absolute good fellow, I will drinke with thee.
Haue you prepar'd his Cup?
Tis in readinesse.
By your leaue, Gallants, I come to speake with a young Lady, as they say, the old Troianes daughter of the house.
Your businesse with my Lady daughter, Tosse-pot?
Tosse-pot? O base! Tosse-pot?
Peace; do'st not see in what case he is? I would doe my owne commendations to her; that's all.
Doe, come my Genius, we will quaffe in wine
Till we grow wise.
True Nectar is diuine.
So, I am glad he is gone. Page, walke aside. Sweet Beauty, I am sent Embassadour from the Mistris of my thoughts, to you, the Mistris of my desires.
So Sir, I pray be briefe.
That you may know, I am not as they say, an Animall; which is as they say, a kinde of Cokes, which is as the learned terme, an Asse, a Puppy, a Widgin, a Dolt, a Noddy, a—
As you please.
Pardon me for that, it shall be as you please indeed. Forsooth I loue to be courtly, and in fashion.
Well, to your Embasie; what, or from whom?
Marry what is more then I know? for to know what's what, is to know what's what, and for what's what : but these are foolish figures, and to little purpose.
From whom then are you sent?
There you come to me agen: O, to bee in the fauour of great Ladies, is asmuch to say, as to be great in Ladies fauours.
Good time a day t'ee; I can stay no longer.
By this light but you must, for now I come toot. The most excellent, most wise, most dainty, precious, lo uing, kinde, sweet, intolerably faire Lady Thamasta commends to your little hands, this letter of impor tance. By your leaue, let me first kisse and then deliuer it in fashion, to your owne proper beauty.
To me from her? Tis strange; I dare peruse it.
Good, O that I had not resolu'd to liue a sin gle life! Heer's temptation able to coniure vp a spirit with a witnesse. So so: she has read it.
Is't possible? Heauen, thou art great and bountiful.
Sir, I much thanke your paines: and to the Princesse,
Let my loue, duty, seruice, be remembred.
They shall Mad-dame.
When we of hopes, or helpes, are quite bereauen,
Our humble pray'rs haue entrance into heau'n.
Thats my opinion cleerely and without doubt.
The Prince is throughly mou'd.
I neuer saw him so much distemp'red.
What should this young man bee,
Or whither can he be conuay'd?
Tis to me a mystery, I vnderstand it not.
Nor I.
Yee haue consented all to worke vpon
The softnesse of my nature; but take heede:
Though I can sleepe in silence, and looke on
The mockery yee make of my dull patience;
Yet'ee shall know, the best of yee, that in mee
There is a masculin, a stirring spirit;
Which prouokt, shall like a bearded Comet
Set yee at gaze, and threaten horrour.
Good Sir.
Good Sir. Tis not your actiue wit or language,
Nor your graue politicke wisdomes (Lords) shall dare
To check-mate and controle my iust commands.
Where is the Youth your friend? is be found yet?
Not to be heard of.
Flye then to the desart,
Where thou didst first encounter this Fantasticke,
This airie apparition; come no more
In sight: Get yee all from me; he that stayes,
Is not my friend.
Tis strange.
We must obey.
Some angry power, cheates with rare delusions,
My credulous sense: the very soule of Reason
Is troubled in me—the Physician
Presented a strange Maske, the view of it
Puzzl'd my vnderstanding: but the Boy—
Rhetias, thou art acquainted with my griefes,
Parthenophill is lost, and I would see him;
For he is like to some thing I remember
A great while since, a long, long time agoe.
I haue been diligent (Sir) to pry into euery cor ner for discouery, but cannot meet with him: There is some tricke I am confident.
There is, there is some practice, sleight or plot.
I haue apprehended a faire Wench, in an odde
Priuate lodging in the Citie, as like the Youth
In face, as can by possibility be discern'd.
How Rhetias!
If it be not Parthenophill in long coates,
Tis a spirit in his likenesse; answer
I can get none from her; you shall see her.
The young man in disguise vpon my life,
To steale out of the Land.
Ile send him t'ee.
Doe, doe my Rhetias. As there is by nature
In euery thing created contrarietie:
So likewise is there vnity and league
Betweene them in their kind; but Man, the abstract
Of all perfection, which the workmanship
Of Heauen hath model'd, in himselfe containes
Passions of seuerall qualitie, the musicke
Of mans faire composition best accords,
When tis in consort, not in single straines.
My heart has been vntun'd these many moneths,
Wanting her presence, in whose equall loue
True harmony consisted; liuing here
We are Heau'ns bounty all, but Fortunes exercise.
Minutes are numbred by the fall of Sands;
As by an houre-glasse, the span of time
Doth waste vs to our graues, and we looke on it.
An age of pleasures reuel'd out, comes home
At last, and ends in sorrow, but the life
Weary of ryot, numbers euery Sand,
Wayling in sighes, vntill the last drop downe,
So to conclude calamity in rest.
What Eccho yeelds a voyce to my complaints?
Can I be no where priuate?
Let the substance
As suddenly be hurried from your eyes,
As the vaine sound can passe your eare,
If no impression of a troth vow'd yours, Kneeles.
Retaine a constant memory.
Stand vp; tis not the figure stampt vpon thy cheekes,
The coozenage of thy beauty, grace, or tongue,
Can draw from me a secret, that hath been
The onely lewell of my speechlesse thoughts.
I am so worne away with feares and sorrowes,
So wintred with the tempests of affliction,
That the bright Sunne of your life-quickning presence
Hath scarce one beame of force, to warme againe
That spring of chearefull comfort, which youth once
Apparel'd in fresh lookes.
Cunning Impostor,
Vntruth hath made thee subtle in thy trade:
If any neighbouring Greatnesse hath seduc'd
A free-borne resolution, to attempt
Some bolder act of treachery, by cutting
My weary dayes off. Wherefore ( Cruell-mercy )
Hast thou assum'd a shape, that would make treason
A piety, guilt pardonable, blood-shed
As holy as the sacrifice of peace?
The Incense of my loue-desires, are slam'd
Vpon an Altar of more constant proofe.
Sir, O Sir, turne me backe into the world,
Command me to forget my name, my birth,
My Fathers sadnesse, and my death aliue,
If all remembrance of my Faith hath found
A buriall, without pitie in your scorne.
My scorne (disdainefull Boy) shall soone vn weaue
The web thy Art hath twisted: cast thy shape off,
Disroabe the mantle of a fained Sex,
And so I may be gentle; as thou art,
There's witch-craft in thy language, in thy face,
In thy demeanors; turne, turne from me (prethee)
For my beliefe is arm'd else. Yet ( faire subtilty )
Before we part (for part we must) be true,
Tell me thy Countrey.
Cyprus.
Ha: thy Father.
Meleander.
Hast a name?
A name of misery, the vnfortunate Eroclea.
There is danger
In this seducing counterfeit, great goodnesse!
Hath honesty and vertue left the time?
Are we become so impious, that to tread
The path of impudence, is Law and Iustice?
Thou vizard of a beauty euer sacred,
Giue me thy name.
Whil'st I was lost to memory,
Parthenophill did shrowd my shame in change
Of sundry rare misfortunes: but since now
I am, before I dye, return'd to claime
A Conuoy to my graue, I must not blush
To let Prince Pallador (if I offend,)
Know when he doomes me, that he doomes Eroclea.
I am that wofull Maid.
Ioyne not too fast
Thy penance, with the story of my suffrings.
So dwelt simplicity with virgin truth ;
So Martyrdome and holinesse are twins,
As innocence and sweetnesse on thy tongue.
But let me by degrees collect my senses,
I may abuse my trust. Tell me, what ayre
Hast thou perfum'd, since Tyranny first rauisht
The contract of our hearts?
Deare Sir, in Athens haue I been buried.
Buried! Right, as I
In Cyprus. —Come to triall, if thou beest
Eroclea, in my bosome I can finde thee.
As I, Prince Palador, in mine: This gift
His bounty blest me with, the onely physicke
My solitary cares haue hourely tooke,
To keepe me from despaire.
We are but Fooles
To trifle in disputes, or vainely struggle
With that eternall mercy which protects vs.
Come home, home to my heart, thou banisht-peace,
My extasie of ioyes would speake in passion,
But that I would not lose that part of man,
Which is reseru'd to intertaine content.
Eroclea, I am thine; O let me seize thee
As my inheritance. Hymen shall now
Set all his Torches burning, to giue light
Throughout this Land, new settled in thy welcome.
You are still gracious. Sir, how I haue liu'd,
By what meanes been conuey'd, by what preseru'd,
By what return'd; Rhetias, my trusty seruant,
Directed by the wisdome of my Vncle,
The good Sophronos, can informe at large.
Enough, in stead of Musicke, euery night
To make our sleepes delightfull, thou shalt cloze
Our weary eyes with some part of thy story.
O but my Father!
Feare not: to behold
Eroclea safe, will make him young againe;
It shall be our first taske. Blush sensuall follies,
A Cast-away, a poore despised Maid,
Onely for me to hope was almost sinne,
Yet troth I neuer tempted him.
Chide not the grossenes of my trespasse (louely Sweetnes)
In such an humble language, I haue smarted
Already in the wounds, my pride hath made
Vpon thy sufferings. Henceforth tis in you
To worke my happinesse.
Call any seruice
Of mine a debt, for such it is; the Letter
You lately sent me, in the blest contents
It made me priuy to, hath largely quitted
Euery suspition of your Grace or goodnesse.
Let me imbrace thee with a Sisters loue,
A Sisters loue, Cleophila: for should
My Brother henceforth study to forget
The vowes that he hath made thee, I would euer
Sollicite thy deserts.
We must haue entrance.
Must? Who are they say, must? you are vn mannerly.
Brother is't you, and you too, Sir?
Your Ladiship has had a time of
Scolding to your humour:
Does the storme hold still?
Neuer fell a showre
More seasonably gentle on the barren
Parcht thirsty earth, then showres of courtesie
Haue from this Princesse been distilled on me,
To make my growth in quiet of my mind
Secure and lasting.
You may both beleeue that I was not vnciuill.
Pish, I know her spirit, and her enuy.
Now in troth, Sir,
Pray credit me, I doe not vse to sweare ▪
The vertuous Princesse hath in words and carriage
Been kind, so ouer-kind, that I doe blush:
I am not rich enough in thankes sufficient
For her vnequall'd bounty.—My good Cousin,
I haue a suite to you.
It shall be granted.
That no time, no perswasion, no respects
Of Iealousies past, present, or hereafter
By possibilitie to be conceiued,
Draw you from that sincerity and purenesse
Of loue, which you haue oftentimes protested
To this great worthy Lady she deserues
A duty more, then what the tyes of Marriage
Can claime, or warrant: be for euer hers,
As she is yours, and Heauen increase your comforts.
Clophila hath play'd the Church-mans part,
Ile not forbid the Banes.
Are you consented?
I haue one taske in charge first, which concernes me.
Brother, be not more cruell then this Lady,
She hath forgiuen my follies, so may you:
Her youth, her beauty, innocence, discretion,
Without additions of estate or birth,
Are dower for a Prince indeed. You lou'd her;
For sure you swore you did: else if you did not
Here fixe your heart, and thus resolue, if now
You misse this Heauen on earth, you cannot find
In any other choice ought but a hell.
The Ladies are turn'd Lawyers, and pleade hand somely
Their Clients cases. I am an easie Iudge,
And so shalt thou be Menaphon. I giue thee
My Sister for a wise; a good one, friend.
Lady, will you confirme the gift?
The errors of my mistaken iudgement being lost,
To your remembrance, I shall euer striue
In my obedience to deserue your pity.
My loue, my care, my all.
What rests for me?
I'm still a Batchelor: Sweet Maid, resolue me,
May I yet call you mine?
My Lord Amethus,
Blame not my plainenesse, I am young and simple,
And haue not any power to dispose
Mine owne will without warrant from my father:
That purchast, I am yours.
It shall suffice me.
Reuenge, I must haue reuenge; I will haue re uenge bitter and abominable reuenge; I will haue re uenge. This vnfashionable Mungrill, this Linsey-wool sey of mortality by this hand, Mistris, this shee-Roague is drunke, and clapper-clawd me without any reuerence to my person, or good garments, why d'ee not speake, Gentlemen.
Some certaine blowes haue past, and't like your Highnesse.
Some few knocks of Friendship, some loue-toyes, some Cuffes in kindnesse, or so.
Ile turne him away, he shall bee my Master no longer.
Is this your she-Page, Cuculus ? tis a Boy, sure.
A Boy, an arrant Boy in long coates.
He has mumbled his nose, that tis as big as a great Cod peece.
Oh thou Cock vermine of iniquity.
Pelias, take hence the wag and schoole him for't.
For your part, seruant, Ile intreate the Prince
To grant you some fit place about his Wardrobe.
Euer after a bloody nose do I dreame of good lucke.
I horribly thanke your Ladiship.
Whil'st I'm in office, the old garbe shall agen
Grow in request, and Taylors shall be men.
Come Trollio, helpe to wash my face, prethee.
Yes, and to scowre it too.—
The Prince and Princesse are at hand, giue ouer your amorous Dialogues. Most honor'd Lady, hence forth forbeare your sadnesse: are you ready to practise your instructions?
I haue studied
My part with care, and will performe it ( Rhetias )
With all the skill I can.
Ile passe my word for her.
Thus Princes should be circled with a guard
Of truly noble friends, and watchfull subiects.
O Rhetias, thou art iust; the Youth thou told'st me.
That liu'd at Athens, is returnd at last
To her owne fortunes, and contracted I oue.
My knowledge made me sure of my report, Sir.
Eroclea, cleare thy feares, when the Sun shines,
Clouds must not dare to muster in the skie,
Nor shal they here—Why do they kneele? Stand vp,
The day and place is priuiledg'd.
Your presence, Great Sir, makes euery roome a Sanctuary.
Wherefore does this young virgin vse such cir cumstance,
In duty to vs? Rise.
Tis I must raise her.
Forgiue me, Sister, I haue been too priuate,
In hiding from your knowledge any secret
That should haue been in common twixt our soules:
But I was rul'd by councell.
That I shew my selfe a Girle (Sister) and bewray
Ioy in too soft a passion'fore all these,
I hope you cannot blame me.
We must part:
The sudden meeting of these two faire Riuolets
With th' Iland of our armes, Cleophila,
The custome of thy piety hath built
Euen to thy younger yeeres a Monument
Of memorable Fame; some great reward
Must wait on thy desert.
The Prince speakes t'ee, Neece.
Chat low, I pray; let's about our businesse.
The good old man awakes: my Lord, with-draw;
Rhetias, let's settle here the Coach.
Away then.
Fly hence, shadowes, that doe keep
Watchfull sorrowes, charm'd in sleepe;
Though the Eyes be ouertaken,
Yet the Heart doth euer waken
Thoughts, chain'd vp in busie snares
Of continuall woes and cares:
Loue and griefes are so exprest,
As they rather sigh then rest.
Fly hence, shadowes, that doe keepe
Watchfull sorrowes, charm'd in sleepe.
Where am I? Ha? What sounds are these? Tis day, sure.
Oh, I haue slept belike: tis but the foolery
Of some beguiling dreame. So, so, I will not
Trouble the play of my delighted Fancy
But dreame my dreame out.
Morrow to your Lordship:
You tooke a iolly nap, and slept it soundly.
Away, beast, let me alone.
O, by your leaue, Sir.
I must be bold to raise yee, else your Phisicke
Will turne to further sicknes.
Phisick, Beare-leech?
Yes phisick, you are mad.
Trollio, Cleophila.
Sir, I am here.
I know thee, Rhetias, prethee rid the roome
Of this tormenting noyse. He tells me, sirra.
I haue tooke phisick, Rhetias, phisicke, phisicke.
Sir true, you haue; and this most learned Scho ler
Apply'd t'ee. O you were in dangerous plight
Before he tooke ye hand.
These things are drunke,
Directly drunke. Where did you get your liquor?
I neuer saw a body in the wane
Of age, so ouer spred with seuerall sorts
Of such diseases as the strength of Youth
Would groane vnder and sinke.
The more your glory in the miraculous cure.
Bring me the Cordiall
Prepar'd for him to take after his sleepe,
Twill doe him good at heart.
I hope it will, Sir.
What do'st think I am, that thou should'st fiddle
So much vpon my patience? Foole, the waight
Of my disease sits on my heart so heauy,
That all the hands of Art cannot remoue
One graine to ease my griefe. If thou cood'st poyson
My memory, or wrap my senses vp
Into a dulnesse, hard and cold as Flints?
If thou cood'st make me walke, speake, eate and laugh
Without a sense or knowledge of my faculties,
Why then perhaps at Marts thou might'st make benefit
Of such an Anticke motion, and get credit
From credulous gazers, but not profit me.
Study to gull the wise; I am too simple
To be wrought on.
Ile burne my bookes (old man)
But I will doe thee good, and quickly too.
Most honor'd Lord Meleander, our great Master,
Prince Palador of Cyprus, hath by me
Sent you this Patent, in which is contain'd
Not onely confirmation of the Honors
You formerly enioyed, but the addition
Of the Marshalship of Cyprus, and ere long
He meanes to visit you. Excuse my haste,
I must attend the Prince.—
There's one Pill workes.
Do'st know that spirit? tis a graue familiar,
And talkt I know not what.
Hee's like, me thinks, the Prince his Tutor, Aretus.
Yes, yes; it may be I haue seene such a formality;
No matter where, or when.
The Prince hath sent ye
(My Lord) this Staffe of Office, and withall
Salutes you Grand Commander of the Ports
Throughout his Principalities. He shortly
Will visit you himselfe: I must attend him.—
D'ee feele your physick stirring yet?
A Diuell is a rare Iuggler, and can cheate the eye,
But not corrupt the reason in the Throne
Of a pure soule.—Another? I will stand thee,
Be what thou canst, I care not.
From the Prince, deare Brother, I present you this rich Relique,
A Iewell he hath long worne in his bosome:
Henceforth he bade mee say, he does beseech you
To call him sonne, for he will call you Father.
It is an honor (brother) that a subiect
Cannot but intertaine with thankfull pray'rs.
Be moderate in your loyes, he will in person
Confirme my errand, but commands my seruice.
What hope now of your Cure?
Stay, stay—What Earthquakes
Roule in my flesh? here's Prince, and Prince and Prince;
Prince vpon Prince: the dotage of my sorrowes
Reuells in magick of ambitious scorne,
Be they Inchantments deadly (as the graue)
Ile looke vpon'em: Patent, staffe, and Relick
To the last first. Round me, ye guarding ministers
And euer keepe me waking till the Cliffes
That ouer hang my sight fall off, and leaue
These hollow spaces to be cram'd with dust.
Tis time I see to fetch the Cordiall. Prethee
Sit downe: Ile instantly be here againe—
Good, giue me leaue, I will sit downe indeed:
Here's Company enough for me to prate to,
Tis the same, the cunning Artsman
Faultred not in a line. Coo'd he haue fashen'd
A little hollow space here, and blowne breath
To haue made it moue, and whispher, 't had bin excellent.
But faith, tis well, tis very well as tis.
Passing, most passing well.
The soueraigne Greatnesse,
Who, by Commission from the powers of heauen,
Swayes both this Land and vs, our gracious Prince,
By me presents you (Sir) with this large bounty,
A gift more precious to him then his birth-right.
Here let your cares take end; now set at liberty
Your long imprison'd heart, and welcome home
The solace of your soule, too long kept from you.
Deare Sir, you know me.
Yes, thou art my Daughter:
My eldest blessing. Know thee? Why Eroclea,
I neuer did forget thee in thy absence.
Poore soule, how do'st?
The best of my well-being consists in yours.
Stand vp: the gods who hitherto
Haue kept vs both aliue, preserue thee euer.
I thanke thee and the Prince,
I thanke thee too, Eroclea, that thou would'st
In pitie of my age, take so much paines
To liue, till I might once more looke vpon thee,
Before I broke my heart: O twas a piece
Of piety and duty vnexampled.
The good-man rellisheth his comforts strangely,
The sight doth turne me child.
I haue not words that can expresse my ioyes.
Nor I.
Nor I: yet let vs gaze on one another freely,
And surfet with our eyes; let me be plaine,
If I should speake as much as I should speake,
I should talke of a thousand things at once,
And all of thee, of thee (my child) of thee:
My teares like ruffling winds lockt vp in Caues,
Doe bustle for a vent—on t'other side,
To flye out into mirth were not so comely.
Come hither, let me kisse thee—with a pride,
Strength, courage, and fresh blood, which now thy pre sence
Hath stor'd me with, I kneele before their Altars,
Whose soueraignty kept guard about thy safety.
Aske, aske thy Sister (prethee) shee'le tell thee
How I haue been much mad.
Much discontented,
Shunning all meanes that might procure him comfort.
Heauen ha's at last been gracious.
So say I but wherefore crop thy words in such a sloth ,
As if thou wert afraid to mingle truth.
With thy misfortunes? Vnderstand me throughly,
I would not haue thee to report at large
From point to point, a Iournall of thy absence:
T'will take vp too much time, I would securely
Ingrosse the little remnant of my life,
That thou might'st euery day be telling somewhat,
Which might conuay me to my rest with comfort.
Let me be thinke me, how we parted first:
Puzzles my faint remembrance—But soft,
thou toldst me, that the Prince
Sent me this present.
From this own faire hands I did receiue my Sister.
To requite him, we will not dig his Fathers graue anew,
Although the mention of him much concernes
The businesse we inquire of—as I said,
We parted in a hurry at the Court,
I to this Castle, after made my layle.
But whither thou, deare heart?
Now they fall too't, I lookt for this.
I by my Vncles care ( Sophronos ▪ my good Vncle) suddenly was like a Saylers Boy conuey'd a shipboord that euery night.
A policie quicke and strange.
The ship was bound for Corinth, whither first
Attended onely with your seruant Rhetias,
And all fit necessaries, we arriu'd:
From thence in habit of a youth we iourney'd
To Athens, where till our returne of late,
Haue we liu'd safe.
Oh what a thing is man,
To bandy factions of distemp'red passions,
Against the sacred prouidence aboue him?
Here in the Legend of thy two yeeres exile,
Rare pity and delight are sweetly mixt,
And still thou wert a Boy.
So I obey'd my Vncles wise command.
Twas safely carried, I humbly thanke thy Fate.
If earthly treasures
Are powr'd in plenty downe from Heau'n on mortals;
They reigne amongst those Oracles, that flow
In Scholes of sacred knowledge; such is Athens:
Yet Athens was to me but a faire prison:
The thoughts of you, my Sister, Country, Fortunes,
And something of the Prince, barr'd all contents,
Which else might rauish sence: for had not, Rhetias,
Been alwaies comfortable to me, certainely
Things had gone worse.
Speake low Eroclea ;
That something of the Prince beares danger in it:
Yet thou hast trauayl'd (Wench) for such Indowments,
As might create a Prince a wife fit for him,
Had he the World to guide: but touch not there;
How cam'st thou home?
Sir, with your Noble sauour,
Kissing your hand first, that point I can answer.
Honest, right honest Rhetias.
Your graue Brother
Perceiu'd with what a hopelesse loue his sonne,
Lord Menaphon, too eagerly pursu'd
Thamasta, Cousin to our present Prince;
And to remoue the violence of affection,
Sent him to Athens, where for twelue moneths space
Your daughter, my young Lady and her Cousin
Enioy'd each others griefes, till by his Father
The Lord Sophronos we were all call'd home.
Enough, enough, the world shall henceforth witnesse
My thankfulnes to Heauen, and those people
Who haue been pitifull to me and mine.
Lend me a Looking-glasse—How now? How came I
So courtly in fresh rayments?
Here's the Glasse, Sir.
I'm in the trim too.—O Cleophila,
This was the goodnesse of thy care and cunning.—
Whence comes this noyse?
The Prince my Lord in person.
Ye shall not kneele to vs; rise all, I charge ye:
Father, you wrong your age, henceforth my armes
And heart shall be your guard; we haue o're-heard
All passages of your vnited loues.
Be young againe, Meleander, liue to number
An happy generation, and dye old
In comforts as in yeeres. The Offices
And Honours which I late on thee conferr'd,
Are not fantasticke bounties, but thy merit;
Enioy them liberally.
My teares must thanke ye, for my tongue cannot.
I haue kept my promise, & giuen you a sure cordial.
O, a rare one.
Good man, wee both haue shar'd enough of sadnes:
Though thine ha's tasted deeper of th'extreme;
Let vs forget it henceforth. Where's the picture
I sent yee? Keepe it, tis a counterfeit,
And in exchange of that, I ceaze on this,
The reall substance: with this other hand
I giue away before her Fathers face
His younger ioy, Cleophila, to thee
Cousin Amethus : take her, and be to her
More then a Father, a deseruing husband.
Thus rob'd of both thy children in a minute,
Thy cares are taken off.
My braines are dull'd;
I am intranc'd, and know not what you meane:
Great, gracious Sir, alas, why do you mocke me?
I am a weake old man, so poore and seeble,
That my vntoward ioynts can scarcely creepe
Vnto the graue, where I must seeke my rest.
Eroclea was you know, contracted mine;
Cleophila, my Cousins by consent
Of both their hearts: We both now claime our owne;
It onely rests in you to giue a blessing
For confirmation.
Sir, tis truth and iustice.
The gods that lent ye to me, blesse your vowes:
O Children, children, pay your prayers to Heauen,
For they haue shew'd much mercy. But Sophronos,
Thou art my Brother: I can say no more:
A good, good Brother.
Leaue the rest to time.
Cousin Thamasta, I must giue you too:
She's thy wife, Menaphon. Rhetias, for thee
And Corax, I haue more then common thanks.
On, to the Temple; there all solemne Rites
Perform'd, a generall Feast shall be proclaim'd.
The Louers Melancholy hath found cure;
Sorrowes are chang'd to Bride-songs. So they thriue,
Whom Fate in spite of stormes hath kept aliue.
TO be too confident, is as vniust
In any Worke, as too much to distrust;
Who from the lawes of study haue not sweru'd,
Know, beg'd applauses neuer were deseru'd.
We must submit to Censure: so doth He,
Whose houres begot this issue; yet being free
For his part, if He haue not pleas'd you, then
In this kinde, hee'le not trouble you agen.